Volume 1



Calculus Volume 1 

SENIOR CONTRIBUTING AUTHORS 
GILBERT STRANG, MASSACHUSETTS INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY 
EDWIN “JED” HERMAN, UNIVERSITY OF WISCONSIN-STEVENS POINT 



OpenStax 
Rice University 
6100 Main Street MS-375 
Houston, Texas 77005 

To learn more about OpenStax, visit https://openstax.org. 
Individual print copies and bulk orders can be purchased through our website. 

©2016 Rice University. Textbook content produced by OpenStax is licensed under a Creative Commons 
Attribution Non-Commercial ShareAlike 4.0 International License (CC BY-NC-SA 4.0). Under this license, any 
user of this textbook or the textbook contents herein can share, remix, and build upon the content for 
noncommercial purposes only. Any adaptations must be shared under the same type of license. In any case of 
sharing the original or adapted material, whether in whole or in part, the user must provide proper attribution 
as follows: 

- If you noncommercially redistribute this textbook in a digital format (including but not limited to PDF and 
HTML), then you must retain on every page the following attribution: 
“Access for free at openstax.org.” 

- If you noncommercially redistribute this textbook in a print format, then you must include on every 
physical page the following attribution: 
“Access for free at openstax.org.” 

- If you noncommercially redistribute part of this textbook, then you must retain in every digital format 
page view (including but not limited to PDF and HTML) and on every physical printed page the following 
attribution: 
“Access for free at openstax.org.” 

- If you use this textbook as a bibliographic reference, please include 
https://openstax.org/details/books/calculus-volume-1 in your citation. 

For questions regarding this licensing, please contact support@openstax.org. 

Trademarks 
The OpenStax name, OpenStax logo, OpenStax book covers, OpenStax CNX name, OpenStax CNX logo, 
OpenStax Tutor name, Openstax Tutor logo, Connexions name, Connexions logo, Rice University name, and 
Rice University logo are not subject to the license and may not be reproduced without the prior and express 
written consent of Rice University. 

Kendall Hunt and the Kendall Hunt Logo are trademarks of Kendall Hunt. The Kendall Hunt mark is registered 
in the United States, Canada, and the European Union. These trademarks may not be used without the prior 
and express written consent of Kendall Hunt. 

COLOR PAPERBACK BOOK ISBN-13 978-1-938168-02-4 
B&W PAPERBACK BOOK ISBN-13 978-1-50669-806-9 
DIGITAL VERSION ISBN-13 978-1-947172-13-5 
ORIGINAL PUBLICATION YEAR 2016 
4 5 6 7 8 9 10 CJP 26 20 18 16 



OPENSTAX 

OpenStax provides free, peer-reviewed, openly licensed textbooks for introductory college and Advanced 
Placement® courses and low-cost, personalized courseware that helps students learn. A nonprofit ed tech 
initiative based at Rice University, we’re committed to helping students access the tools they need to complete 
their courses and meet their educational goals. 

RICE UNIVERSITY 

OpenStax is an initiative of Rice University. As a leading research university with a distinctive commitment to 
undergraduate education, Rice University aspires to path-breaking research, unsurpassed teaching, and 
contributions to the betterment of our world. It seeks to fulfill this mission by cultivating a diverse community 
of learning and discovery that produces leaders across the spectrum of human endeavor. 

PHILANTHROPIC SUPPORT 

OpenStax is grateful for the generous philanthropic partners who advance our mission to improve educational 
access and learning for everyone. To see the impact of our supporter community and our most updated list of 
partners, please visit openstax.org/foundation. 

Arnold Ventures Burt and Deedee McMurtry 
Chan Zuckerberg Initiative Michelson 20MM Foundation 
Chegg, Inc. National Science Foundation 
Arthur and Carlyse Ciocca Charitable Foundation The Open Society Foundations 
Digital Promise Jumee Yhu and David E. Park III 
Ann and John Doerr Brian D. Patterson USA-International Foundation 
Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation The Bill and Stephanie Sick Fund 
Girard Foundation Steven L. Smith & Diana T. Go 
Google Inc. Stand Together 
The William and Flora Hewlett Foundation Robin and Sandy Stuart Foundation 
The Hewlett-Packard Company The Stuart Family Foundation 
Intel Inc. Tammy and Guillermo Treviño 
Rusty and John Jaggers Valhalla Charitable Foundation 
The Calvin K. Kazanjian Economics Foundation White Star Education Foundation 
Charles Koch Foundation Schmidt Futures 
Leon Lowenstein Foundation, Inc. William Marsh Rice University 
The Maxfield Foundation 



Study where you want, what 
you want, when you want. 

When you access your book in our web view, you can use our new online 
highlighting and note-taking features to create your own study guides. 

Our books are free and flexible, forever. 
Get started at openstax.org/details/books/calculus-volume-1 

Access. The future of education. 
openstax.org          



Contents 

Preface 1 

1 Functions and Graphs 7 
Introduction 7 
1.1 Review of Functions 8 
1.2 Basic Classes of Functions 30 
1.3 Trigonometric Functions 53 
1.4 Inverse Functions 65 
1.5 Exponential and Logarithmic Functions 80 
Chapter Review 99 

2 Limits 105 
Introduction 105 
2.1 A Preview of Calculus 106 
2.2 The Limit of a Function 116 
2.3 The Limit Laws 140 
2.4 Continuity 155 
2.5 The Precise Definition of a Limit 169 
Chapter Review 182 

3 Derivatives 187 
Introduction 187 
3.1 Defining the Derivative 188 
3.2 The Derivative as a Function 203 
3.3 Differentiation Rules 216 
3.4 Derivatives as Rates of Change 230 
3.5 Derivatives of Trigonometric Functions 241 
3.6 The Chain Rule 250 
3.7 Derivatives of Inverse Functions 259 
3.8 Implicit Differentiation 268 
3.9 Derivatives of Exponential and Logarithmic Functions 275 
Chapter Review 288 

4 Applications of Derivatives 295 
Introduction 295 
4.1 Related Rates 296 
4.2 Linear Approximations and Differentials 308 
4.3 Maxima and Minima 317 
4.4 The Mean Value Theorem 329 
4.5 Derivatives and the Shape of a Graph 339 
4.6 Limits at Infinity and Asymptotes 354 
4.7 Applied Optimization Problems 381 
4.8 L’Hôpital’s Rule 394 
4.9 Newton’s Method 409 



4.10 Antiderivatives 419 
Chapter Review 431 

5 Integration 437 
Introduction 437 
5.1 Approximating Areas 438 
5.2 The Definite Integral 456 
5.3 The Fundamental Theorem of Calculus 472 
5.4 Integration Formulas and the Net Change Theorem 488 
5.5 Substitution 506 
5.6 Integrals Involving Exponential and Logarithmic Functions 516 
5.7 Integrals Resulting in Inverse Trigonometric Functions 526 
Chapter Review 533 

6 Applications of Integration 539 
Introduction 539 
6.1 Areas between Curves 540 
6.2 Determining Volumes by Slicing 551 
6.3 Volumes of Revolution: Cylindrical Shells 569 
6.4 Arc Length of a Curve and Surface Area 582 
6.5 Physical Applications 594 
6.6 Moments and Centers of Mass 610 
6.7 Integrals, Exponential Functions, and Logarithms 626 
6.8 Exponential Growth and Decay 636 
6.9 Calculus of the Hyperbolic Functions 646 
Chapter Review 657 

A Table of Integrals 665 

B Table of Derivatives 671 

C Review of Pre-Calculus 673 

Answer Key 677 

Index 759 

Access for free at openstax.org



Preface     1

Preface 
Welcome to Calculus Volume 1, an OpenStax resource. This textbook was written to increase student access to high-
quality learning materials, maintaining highest standards of academic rigor at little to no cost. 

About OpenStax 
OpenStax is a nonprofit based at Rice University, and it’s our mission to improve student access to education. Our first 
openly licensed college textbook was published in 2012, and our library has since scaled to over 25 books for college and 
AP® courses used by hundreds of thousands of students. OpenStax Tutor, our low-cost personalized learning tool, is 
being used in college courses throughout the country. Through our partnerships with philanthropic foundations and our 
alliance with other educational resource organizations, OpenStax is breaking down the most common barriers to 
learning and empowering students and instructors to succeed. 

About OpenStax's resources 
Customization 
Calculus Volume 1 is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International (CC-
BY-NC-SA) license, which means that you can distribute, remix, and build upon the content, as long as you provide 
attribution to OpenStax and its content contributors, do not use the content for commercial purposes, and distribute the 
content under the same CC-BY-NC-SA license. 
Because our books are openly licensed, you are free to use the entire book or pick and choose the sections that are most 
relevant to the needs of your course. Feel free to remix the content by assigning your students certain chapters and 
sections in your syllabus, in the order that you prefer. You can even provide a direct link in your syllabus to the sections in 
the web view of your book. 
Instructors also have the option of creating a customized version of their OpenStax book. The custom version can be 
made available to students in low-cost print or digital form through their campus bookstore. Visit your book page on 
OpenStax.org for more information. 

Errata 
All OpenStax textbooks undergo a rigorous review process. However, like any professional-grade textbook, errors 
sometimes occur. Since our books are web based, we can make updates periodically when deemed pedagogically 
necessary. If you have a correction to suggest, submit it through the link on your book page on OpenStax.org. Subject 
matter experts review all errata suggestions. OpenStax is committed to remaining transparent about all updates, so you 
will also find a list of past errata changes on your book page on OpenStax.org. 

Format 
You can access this textbook for free in web view or PDF through OpenStax.org, and for a low cost in print. 

About Calculus Volume 1 
Calculus is designed for the typical two- or three-semester general calculus course, incorporating innovative features to 
enhance student learning. The book guides students through the core concepts of calculus and helps them understand 
how those concepts apply to their lives and the world around them. Due to the comprehensive nature of the material, 
we are offering the book in three volumes for flexibility and efficiency. Volume 1 covers functions, limits, derivatives, and 
integration. 

Coverage and scope 
Our Calculus Volume 1 textbook adheres to the scope and sequence of most general calculus courses nationwide. We 
have worked to make calculus interesting and accessible to students while maintaining the mathematical rigor inherent 
in the subject. With this objective in mind, the content of the three volumes of Calculus have been developed and 
arranged to provide a logical progression from fundamental to more advanced concepts, building upon what students 
have already learned and emphasizing connections between topics and between theory and applications. The goal of 
each section is to enable students not just to recognize concepts, but work with them in ways that will be useful in later 
courses and future careers. The organization and pedagogical features were developed and vetted with feedback from 
mathematics educators dedicated to the project. 
Volume 1 

• Chapter 1: Functions and Graphs 
• Chapter 2: Limits 
• Chapter 3: Derivatives 
• Chapter 4: Applications of Derivatives 



2     Preface

• Chapter 5: Integration 
• Chapter 6: Applications of Integration 

Volume 2 
• Chapter 1: Integration 
• Chapter 2: Applications of Integration 
• Chapter 3: Techniques of Integration 
• Chapter 4: Introduction to Differential Equations 
• Chapter 5: Sequences and Series 
• Chapter 6: Power Series 
• Chapter 7: Parametric Equations and Polar Coordinates 

Volume 3 
• Chapter 1: Parametric Equations and Polar Coordinates 
• Chapter 2: Vectors in Space 
• Chapter 3: Vector-Valued Functions 
• Chapter 4: Differentiation of Functions of Several Variables 
• Chapter 5: Multiple Integration 
• Chapter 6: Vector Calculus 
• Chapter 7: Second-Order Differential Equations 

Pedagogical foundation 
Throughout Calculus Volume 1 you will find examples and exercises that present classical ideas and techniques as well as 
modern applications and methods. Derivations and explanations are based on years of classroom experience on the part 
of long-time calculus professors, striving for a balance of clarity and rigor that has proven successful with their students. 
Motivational applications cover important topics in probability, biology, ecology, business, and economics, as well as 
areas of physics, chemistry, engineering, and computer science. Student Projects in each chapter give students 
opportunities to explore interesting sidelights in pure and applied mathematics, from determining a safe distance 
between the grandstand and the track at a Formula One racetrack, to calculating the center of mass of the Grand 
Canyon Skywalk or the terminal speed of a skydiver. Chapter Opening Applications pose problems that are solved later 
in the chapter, using the ideas covered in that chapter. Problems include the hydraulic force against the Hoover Dam, and 
the comparison of relative intensity of two earthquakes. Definitions, Rules, and Theorems are highlighted throughout 
the text, including over 60 Proofs of theorems. 

Assessments that reinforce key concepts 
In-chapter Examples walk students through problems by posing a question, stepping out a solution, and then asking 
students to practice the skill with a “Checkpoint” question. The book also includes assessments at the end of each 
chapter so students can apply what they’ve learned through practice problems. Many exercises are marked with a [T] to 
indicate they are suitable for solution by technology, including calculators or Computer Algebra Systems (CAS). Answers 
for selected exercises are available in the Answer Key at the back of the book. 

Early or late transcendentals 
Calculus Volume 1 is designed to accommodate both Early and Late Transcendental approaches to calculus. Exponential 
and logarithmic functions are introduced informally in Chapter 1 and presented in more rigorous terms in Chapter 6. 
Differentiation and integration of these functions is covered in Chapters 3–5 for instructors who want to include them 
with other types of functions. These discussions, however, are in separate sections that can be skipped for instructors 
who prefer to wait until the integral definitions are given before teaching the calculus derivations of exponentials and 
logarithms. 

Comprehensive art program 
Our art program is designed to enhance students’ understanding of concepts through clear and effective illustrations, 
diagrams, and photographs. 

Access for free at openstax.org



Preface     3

Answers to Questions in the Book 
Answers to Examples are provided just below the question in the book. All Checkpoint answers are provided in the 
Answer Key. Odd-numbered Exercises and Review Exercises questions are provided to students in the Answer Key as well 
as the Student Solution Guide on the Student Resources page. Even-numbered answers are provided only to instructors 
in the Instructor Answer Guide via the Instructor Resources page. 

Additional resources 
Student and instructor resources 
We’ve compiled additional resources for both students and instructors, including Getting Started Guides, an instructor 
solution manual, and PowerPoint slides. Instructor resources require a verified instructor account, which can be 
requested on your OpenStax.org log-in. Take advantage of these resources to supplement your OpenStax book. 

Community Hubs 
OpenStax partners with the Institute for the Study of Knowledge Management in Education (ISKME) to offer Community 
Hubs on OER Commons – a platform for instructors to share community-created resources that support OpenStax 
books, free of charge. Through our Community Hubs, instructors can upload their own materials or download resources 
to use in their own courses, including additional ancillaries, teaching material, multimedia, and relevant course content. 
We encourage instructors to join the hubs for the subjects most relevant to your teaching and research as an 
opportunity both to enrich your courses and to engage with other faculty. 
To reach the Community Hubs, visit www.oercommons.org/hubs/OpenStax. 

Partner resources 
OpenStax Partners are our allies in the mission to make high-quality learning materials affordable and accessible to 
students and instructors everywhere. Their tools integrate seamlessly with our OpenStax titles at a low cost. To access 
the partner resources for your text, visit your book page on OpenStax.org. 

About the authors 
Senior contributing authors 
Gilbert Strang, Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
Dr. Strang received his PhD from UCLA in 1959 and has been teaching mathematics at MIT ever since. His Calculus online 



4     Preface

textbook is one of eleven that he has published and is the basis from which our final product has been derived and 
updated for today’s student. Strang is a decorated mathematician and past Rhodes Scholar at Oxford University. 
Edwin “Jed” Herman, University of Wisconsin-Stevens Point 
Dr. Herman earned a BS in Mathematics from Harvey Mudd College in 1985, an MA in Mathematics from UCLA in 1987, 
and a PhD in Mathematics from the University of Oregon in 1997. He is currently a Professor at the University of 
Wisconsin-Stevens Point. He has more than 20 years of experience teaching college mathematics, is a student research 
mentor, is experienced in course development/design, and is also an avid board game designer and player. 

Contributing authors 
Catherine Abbott, Keuka College 
Nicoleta Virginia Bila, Fayetteville State University 
Sheri J. Boyd, Rollins College 
Joyati Debnath, Winona State University 
Valeree Falduto, Palm Beach State College 
Joseph Lakey, New Mexico State University 
Julie Levandosky, Framingham State University 
David McCune, William Jewell College 
Michelle Merriweather, Bronxville High School 
Kirsten R. Messer, Colorado State University - Pueblo 
Alfred K. Mulzet, Florida State College at Jacksonville 
William Radulovich (retired), Florida State College at Jacksonville 
Erica M. Rutter, Arizona State University 
David Smith, University of the Virgin Islands 
Elaine A. Terry, Saint Joseph’s University 
David Torain, Hampton University 

Reviewers 
Marwan A. Abu-Sawwa, Florida State College at Jacksonville 
Kenneth J. Bernard, Virginia State University 
John Beyers, University of Maryland 
Charles Buehrle, Franklin & Marshall College 
Matthew Cathey, Wofford College 
Michael Cohen, Hofstra University 
William DeSalazar, Broward County School System 
Murray Eisenberg, University of Massachusetts Amherst 
Kristyanna Erickson, Cecil College 
Tiernan Fogarty, Oregon Institute of Technology 
David French, Tidewater Community College 
Marilyn Gloyer, Virginia Commonwealth University 
Shawna Haider, Salt Lake Community College 
Lance Hemlow, Raritan Valley Community College 
Jerry Jared, The Blue Ridge School 
Peter Jipsen, Chapman University 
David Johnson, Lehigh University 
M.R. Khadivi, Jackson State University 
Robert J. Krueger, Concordia University 
Tor A. Kwembe, Jackson State University 
Jean-Marie Magnier, Springfield Technical Community College 
Cheryl Chute Miller, SUNY Potsdam 
Bagisa Mukherjee, Penn State University, Worthington Scranton Campus 
Kasso Okoudjou, University of Maryland College Park 
Peter Olszewski, Penn State Erie, The Behrend College 
Steven Purtee, Valencia College 
Alice Ramos, Bethel College 
Doug Shaw, University of Northern Iowa 
Hussain Elalaoui-Talibi, Tuskegee University 
Jeffrey Taub, Maine Maritime Academy 
William Thistleton, SUNY Polytechnic Institute 

Access for free at openstax.org



Preface     5

A. David Trubatch, Montclair State University 
Carmen Wright, Jackson State University 
Zhenbu Zhang, Jackson State University 



6     Preface

Access for free at openstax.org



1 • Introduction          7

1 FUNCTIONS AND GRAPHS 

Figure 1.1 A portion of the San Andreas Fault in California. Major faults like this are the sites of most of the strongest 
earthquakes ever recorded. (credit: modification of work by Robb Hannawacker, NPS) 

Chapter Outline 
1.1 Review of Functions 
1.2 Basic Classes of Functions 
1.3 Trigonometric Functions 
1.4 Inverse Functions 
1.5 Exponential and Logarithmic Functions 

Introduction 
In the past few years, major earthquakes have occurred in several countries around the world. In January 2010, an 
earthquake of magnitude 7.3 hit Haiti. A magnitude 9 earthquake shook northeastern Japan in March 2011. In April 
2014, an 8.2-magnitude earthquake struck off the coast of northern Chile. What do these numbers mean? In particular, 
how does a magnitude 9 earthquake compare with an earthquake of magnitude 8.2? Or 7.3? Later in this chapter, we 
show how logarithmic functions are used to compare the relative intensity of two earthquakes based on the magnitude 
of each earthquake (see Example 1.39). 
Calculus is the mathematics that describes changes in functions. In this chapter, we review all the functions necessary to 
study calculus. We define polynomial, rational, trigonometric, exponential, and logarithmic functions. We review how to 
evaluate these functions, and we show the properties of their graphs. We provide examples of equations with terms 
involving these functions and illustrate the algebraic techniques necessary to solve them. In short, this chapter provides 
the foundation for the material to come. It is essential to be familiar and comfortable with these ideas before proceeding 
to the formal introduction of calculus in the next chapter. 



8     1 • Functions and Graphs

1.1 Review of Functions 
Learning Objectives 

1.1.1 Use functional notation to evaluate a function. 
1.1.2 Determine the domain and range of a function. 
1.1.3 Draw the graph of a function. 
1.1.4 Find the zeros of a function. 
1.1.5 Recognize a function from a table of values. 
1.1.6 Make new functions from two or more given functions. 
1.1.7 Describe the symmetry properties of a function. 

In this section, we provide a formal definition of a function and examine several ways in which functions are 
represented—namely, through tables, formulas, and graphs. We study formal notation and terms related to functions. 
We also define composition of functions and symmetry properties. Most of this material will be a review for you, but it 
serves as a handy reference to remind you of some of the algebraic techniques useful for working with functions. 

Functions 
Given two sets  and  a set with elements that are ordered pairs  where  is an element of  and  is an element 
of  is a relation from  to  A relation from  to  defines a relationship between those two sets. A function is a 
special type of relation in which each element of the first set is related to exactly one element of the second set. The 
element of the first set is called the input; the element of the second set is called the output. Functions are used all the 
time in mathematics to describe relationships between two sets. For any function, when we know the input, the output is 
determined, so we say that the output is a function of the input. For example, the area of a square is determined by its 
side length, so we say that the area (the output) is a function of its side length (the input). The velocity of a ball thrown in 
the air can be described as a function of the amount of time the ball is in the air. The cost of mailing a package is a 
function of the weight of the package. Since functions have so many uses, it is important to have precise definitions and 
terminology to study them. 

Definition 

A function  consists of a set of inputs, a set of outputs, and a rule for assigning each input to exactly one output. 
The set of inputs is called the domain of the function. The set of outputs is called the range of the function. 

For example, consider the function  where the domain is the set of all real numbers and the rule is to square the input. 
Then, the input  is assigned to the output  Since every nonnegative real number has a real-value square 
root, every nonnegative number is an element of the range of this function. Since there is no real number with a square 
that is negative, the negative real numbers are not elements of the range. We conclude that the range is the set of 
nonnegative real numbers. 
For a general function  with domain  we often use  to denote the input and  to denote the output associated with 

 When doing so, we refer to  as the independent variable and  as the dependent variable, because it depends on 
 Using function notation, we write  and we read this equation as  equals  of  For the squaring function 

described earlier, we write 
The concept of a function can be visualized using Figure 1.2, Figure 1.3, and Figure 1.4. 

Figure 1.2 A function can be visualized as an input/output device. 

Access for free at openstax.org



1.1 • Review of Functions     9

Figure 1.3 A function maps every element in the domain to exactly one element in the range. Although each input can 
be sent to only one output, two different inputs can be sent to the same output. 

Figure 1.4 In this case, a graph of a function  has a domain of  and a range of  The independent variable 
is  and the dependent variable is 

 MEDIA 

Visit this applet link (http://www.openstax.org/l/grapherrors) to see more about graphs of functions. 

We can also visualize a function by plotting points  in the coordinate plane where  The graph of a 
function is the set of all these points. For example, consider the function  where the domain is the set 
and the rule is  In Figure 1.5, we plot a graph of this function. 

Figure 1.5 Here we see a graph of the function  with domain  and rule  The graph consists of the 
points  for all  in the domain. 

Every function has a domain. However, sometimes a function is described by an equation, as in  with no 
specific domain given. In this case, the domain is taken to be the set of all real numbers, , for which  is a real 
number. For example, since any real number can be squared, if no other domain is specified, we consider the domain of 

 to be the set of all real numbers. On the other hand, the square root function  gives a real output 
only if  is nonnegative. Therefore, the domain of the function  is the set of nonnegative real numbers, 
sometimes called the natural domain. 

For the functions  and  the domains are sets with an infinite number of elements. Clearly we 
cannot list all these elements. When describing a set with an infinite number of elements, it is often helpful to use set-
builder or interval notation. When using set-builder notation to describe a subset of all real numbers, denoted ℝ  we 
write 



10     1 • Functions and Graphs

We read this as the set of real numbers  such that  has some property. For example, if we were interested in the set of 
real numbers that are greater than one but less than five, we could denote this set using set-builder notation by writing 

A set such as this, which contains all numbers greater than  and less than  can also be denoted using the interval 
notation  Therefore, 

The numbers  and  are called the endpoints of this set. If we want to consider the set that includes the endpoints, we 
would denote this set by writing 

We can use similar notation if we want to include one of the endpoints, but not the other. To denote the set of 
nonnegative real numbers, we would use the set-builder notation 

The smallest number in this set is zero, but this set does not have a largest number. Using interval notation, we would 
use the symbol ∞  which refers to positive infinity, and we would write the set as 

∞

It is important to note that ∞  is not a real number. It is used symbolically here to indicate that this set includes all real 
numbers greater than or equal to zero. Similarly, if we wanted to describe the set of all nonpositive numbers, we could 
write 

∞

Here, the notation ∞  refers to negative infinity, and it indicates that we are including all numbers less than or equal to 
zero, no matter how small. The set 

∞ ∞
refers to the set of all real numbers. 
Some functions are defined using different equations for different parts of their domain. These types of functions are 
known as piecewise-defined functions. For example, suppose we want to define a function  with a domain that is the 
set of all real numbers such that  for  and  for  We denote this function by writing 

When evaluating this function for an input  the equation to use depends on whether  or  For example, 
since  we use the fact that  for  and see that  On the other hand, for 

 we use the fact that  for  and see that 

EXAMPLE 1.1 

Evaluating Functions 
For the function  evaluate 
a. 
b. 
c. 

Solution 
Substitute the given value for x in the formula for 

a. 

Access for free at openstax.org



1.1 • Review of Functions     11

b. 

c. 

 1.1 For  evaluate  and 

EXAMPLE 1.2 

Finding Domain and Range 
For each of the following functions, determine the i. domain and ii. range. 

a. 
b. 
c. 

Solution 
a. Consider 

i. Since  is a real number for any real number  the domain of  is the interval ∞ ∞
ii. Since  we know  Therefore, the range must be a subset of  To 

show that every element in this set is in the range, we need to show that for a given  in that set, there is a real 
number  such that  Solving this equation for  we see that we need  such that 

This equation is satisfied as long as there exists a real number  such that 

Since  the square root is well-defined. We conclude that for  and therefore the 
range is 

b. Consider 
i. To find the domain of  we need the expression  Solving this inequality, we conclude that the 

domain is 
ii. To find the range of  we note that since  Therefore, the range of 

must be a subset of the set  To show that every element in this set is in the range of  we need to 
show that for all  in this set, there exists a real number  in the domain such that  Let  Then, 

 if and only if 

Solving this equation for  we see that  must solve the equation 

Since  such an  could exist. Squaring both sides of this equation, we have 
Therefore, we need 

which implies 

We just need to verify that  is in the domain of  Since the domain of  consists of all real numbers greater 



12     1 • Functions and Graphs

than or equal to  and 

there does exist an  in the domain of  We conclude that the range of  is 
c. Consider 

i. Since  is defined when the denominator is nonzero, the domain is 
ii. To find the range of  we need to find the values of  such that there exists a real number  in the domain with 

the property that 

Solving this equation for  we find that 

Therefore, as long as  there exists a real number  in the domain such that  Thus, the range is 

 1.2 Find the domain and range for 

Representing Functions 
Typically, a function is represented using one or more of the following tools: 

• A table 
• A graph 
• A formula 

We can identify a function in each form, but we can also use them together. For instance, we can plot on a graph the 
values from a table or create a table from a formula. 

Tables 
Functions described using a table of values arise frequently in real-world applications. Consider the following simple 
example. We can describe temperature on a given day as a function of time of day. Suppose we record the temperature 
every hour for a 24-hour period starting at midnight. We let our input variable  be the time after midnight, measured in 
hours, and the output variable  be the temperature  hours after midnight, measured in degrees Fahrenheit. We record 
our data in Table 1.1. 

Hours after Midnight Temperature Hours after Midnight Temperature 

0 58 12 84 

1 54 13 85 

2 53 14 85 

3 52 15 83 

4 52 16 82 

5 55 17 80 

Table 1.1 Temperature as a Function of Time of Day 

Access for free at openstax.org



1.1 • Review of Functions     13

Hours after Midnight Temperature Hours after Midnight Temperature 

6 60 18 77 

7 64 19 74 

8 72 20 69 

9 75 21 65 

10 78 22 60 

11 80 23 58 

Table 1.1 Temperature as a Function of Time of Day 

We can see from the table that temperature is a function of time, and the temperature decreases, then increases, and 
then decreases again. However, we cannot get a clear picture of the behavior of the function without graphing it. 

Graphs 
Given a function  described by a table, we can provide a visual picture of the function in the form of a graph. Graphing 
the temperatures listed in Table 1.1 can give us a better idea of their fluctuation throughout the day. Figure 1.6 shows 
the plot of the temperature function. 

Figure 1.6 The graph of the data from Table 1.1 shows temperature as a function of time. 
From the points plotted on the graph in Figure 1.6, we can visualize the general shape of the graph. It is often useful to 
connect the dots in the graph, which represent the data from the table. In this example, although we cannot make any 
definitive conclusion regarding what the temperature was at any time for which the temperature was not recorded, 
given the number of data points collected and the pattern in these points, it is reasonable to suspect that the 
temperatures at other times followed a similar pattern, as we can see in Figure 1.7. 



14     1 • Functions and Graphs

Figure 1.7 Connecting the dots in Figure 1.6 shows the general pattern of the data. 

Algebraic Formulas 
Sometimes we are not given the values of a function in table form, rather we are given the values in an explicit formula. 
Formulas arise in many applications. For example, the area of a circle of radius  is given by the formula 
When an object is thrown upward from the ground with an initial velocity  ft/s, its height above the ground from the 
time it is thrown until it hits the ground is given by the formula  When  dollars are invested in an 
account at an annual interest rate  compounded continuously, the amount of money after  years is given by the 
formula  Algebraic formulas are important tools to calculate function values. Often we also represent these 
functions visually in graph form. 
Given an algebraic formula for a function  the graph of  is the set of points  where  is in the domain of 
and  is in the range. To graph a function given by a formula, it is helpful to begin by using the formula to create a 
table of inputs and outputs. If the domain of  consists of an infinite number of values, we cannot list all of them, but 
because listing some of the inputs and outputs can be very useful, it is often a good way to begin. 
When creating a table of inputs and outputs, we typically check to determine whether zero is an output. Those values of 

 where  are called the zeros of a function. For example, the zeros of  are  The zeros 
determine where the graph of  intersects the -axis, which gives us more information about the shape of the graph of 
the function. The graph of a function may never intersect the x-axis, or it may intersect multiple (or even infinitely many) 
times. 
Another point of interest is the -intercept, if it exists. The -intercept is given by 
Since a function has exactly one output for each input, the graph of a function can have, at most, one -intercept. If 

 is in the domain of a function  then  has exactly one -intercept. If  is not in the domain of  then  has 
no -intercept. Similarly, for any real number  if  is in the domain of  there is exactly one output  and the line 

 intersects the graph of  exactly once. On the other hand, if  is not in the domain of  is not defined and the 
line  does not intersect the graph of  This property is summarized in the vertical line test. 

Rule: Vertical Line Test 

Given a function  every vertical line that may be drawn intersects the graph of  no more than once. If any vertical 
line intersects a set of points more than once, the set of points does not represent a function. 

We can use this test to determine whether a set of plotted points represents the graph of a function (Figure 1.8). 

Access for free at openstax.org



1.1 • Review of Functions     15

Figure 1.8 (a) The set of plotted points represents the graph of a function because every vertical line intersects the set of 
points, at most, once. (b) The set of plotted points does not represent the graph of a function because some vertical lines 
intersect the set of points more than once. 

EXAMPLE 1.3 

Finding Zeros and -Intercepts of a Function 
Consider the function 
a. Find all zeros of 
b. Find the -intercept (if any). 
c. Sketch a graph of 

Solution 
a. To find the zeros, solve  We discover that  has one zero at 
b. The -intercept is given by 
c. Given that  is a linear function of the form  that passes through the points  and  we can 

sketch the graph of  (Figure 1.9). 

Figure 1.9 The function  is a line with 
-intercept  and -intercept 

EXAMPLE 1.4 

Using Zeros and -Intercepts to Sketch a Graph 
Consider the function 



16     1 • Functions and Graphs

a. Find all zeros of 
b. Find the -intercept (if any). 
c. Sketch a graph of 

Solution 
a. To find the zeros, solve  This equation implies  Since  for all  this 

equation has no solutions, and therefore  has no zeros. 
b. The -intercept is given by 
c. To graph this function, we make a table of values. Since we need  we need to choose values of  We 

choose values that make the square-root function easy to evaluate. 

Table 1.2 

Making use of the table and knowing that, since the function is a square root, the graph of  should be similar to the 
graph of  we sketch the graph (Figure 1.10). 

Figure 1.10 The graph of  has a 
-intercept but no -intercepts. 

 1.3 Find the zeros of 

EXAMPLE 1.5 

Finding the Height of a Free-Falling Object 
If a ball is dropped from a height of  ft, its height  at time  is given by the function  where  is 
measured in feet and  is measured in seconds. The domain is restricted to the interval  where  is the time 
when the ball is dropped and  is the time when the ball hits the ground. 
a. Create a table showing the height  when  Using the data from the table, determine 

the domain for this function. That is, find the time  when the ball hits the ground. 
b. Sketch a graph of 

Solution 
a. 

Table 1.3 Height  as a Function of Time 

Access for free at openstax.org



1.1 • Review of Functions     17

Since the ball hits the ground when  the domain of this function is the interval 
b. 

Note that for this function and the function  graphed in Figure 1.9, the values of  are getting smaller 
as  is getting larger. A function with this property is said to be decreasing. On the other hand, for the function 

 graphed in Figure 1.10, the values of  are getting larger as the values of  are getting larger. A 
function with this property is said to be increasing. It is important to note, however, that a function can be increasing on 
some interval or intervals and decreasing over a different interval or intervals. For example, using our temperature 
function in Figure 1.6, we can see that the function is decreasing on the interval  increasing on the interval 
and then decreasing on the interval  We make the idea of a function increasing or decreasing over a particular 
interval more precise in the next definition. 

Definition 

We say that a function  is increasing on the interval  if for all 

We say  is strictly increasing on the interval  if for all 

We say that a function  is decreasing on the interval  if for all 

We say that a function  is strictly decreasing on the interval  if for all 

For example, the function  is increasing on the interval ∞ ∞  because  whenever  On the 
other hand, the function  is strictly decreasing on the interval ∞ ∞  because  whenever 

 (Figure 1.11). 



18     1 • Functions and Graphs

Figure 1.11 (a) The function  is increasing on the interval ∞ ∞  (b) The function  is decreasing 
on the interval ∞ ∞

Combining Functions 
Now that we have reviewed the basic characteristics of functions, we can see what happens to these properties when we 
combine functions in different ways, using basic mathematical operations to create new functions. For example, if the 
cost for a company to manufacture  items is described by the function  and the revenue created by the sale of 
items is described by the function  then the profit on the manufacture and sale of  items is defined as 

 Using the difference between two functions, we created a new function. 

Alternatively, we can create a new function by composing two functions. For example, given the functions  and 
 the composite function  is defined such that 

The composite function  is defined such that 

Note that these two new functions are different from each other. 

Combining Functions with Mathematical Operators 
To combine functions using mathematical operators, we simply write the functions with the operator and simplify. Given 
two functions  and  we can define four new functions: 

Access for free at openstax.org



1.1 • Review of Functions     19

EXAMPLE 1.6 

Combining Functions Using Mathematical Operations 
Given the functions  and  find each of the following functions and state its domain. 
a. 
b. 
c. 
d. 

Solution 
a.  The domain of this function is the interval ∞ ∞
b.  The domain of this function is the interval ∞ ∞
c.  The domain of this function is the interval ∞ ∞
d.  The domain of this function is 

 1.4 For  and  find  and state its domain. 

Function Composition 
When we compose functions, we take a function of a function. For example, suppose the temperature  on a given day 
is described as a function of time  (measured in hours after midnight) as in Table 1.1. Suppose the cost  to heat or cool 
a building for 1 hour, can be described as a function of the temperature  Combining these two functions, we can 
describe the cost of heating or cooling a building as a function of time by evaluating  We have defined a new 
function, denoted  which is defined such that  for all  in the domain of  This new function is 
called a composite function. We note that since cost is a function of temperature and temperature is a function of time, it 
makes sense to define this new function  It does not make sense to consider  because temperature 
is not a function of cost. 

Definition 

Consider the function  with domain  and range  and the function  with domain  and range  If  is a subset 
of  then the composite function  is the function with domain  such that 

(1.1) 

A composite function  can be viewed in two steps. First, the function  maps each input  in the domain of  to its 
output  in the range of  Second, since the range of  is a subset of the domain of  the output  is an element 
in the domain of  and therefore it is mapped to an output  in the range of  In Figure 1.12, we see a visual 
image of a composite function. 

Figure 1.12 For the composite function  we have  and 



20     1 • Functions and Graphs

EXAMPLE 1.7 

Compositions of Functions Defined by Formulas 
Consider the functions  and 
a. Find  and state its domain and range. 
b. Evaluate 
c. Find  and state its domain and range. 
d. Evaluate 

Solution 
a. We can find the formula for  in two different ways. We could write 

Alternatively, we could write 

Since  for all real numbers  the domain of  is the set of all real numbers. Since 
 the range is, at most, the interval  To show that the range is this entire interval, we let 

 and solve this equation for  to show that for all  in the interval  there exists a real number 
such that  Solving this equation for  we see that  which implies that 

If  is in the interval  the expression under the radical is nonnegative, and therefore there exists a real number 
 such that  We conclude that the range of  is the interval 

b. 

c. We can find a formula for  in two ways. First, we could write 

Alternatively, we could write 

The domain of  is the set of all real numbers  such that  To find the range of  we need to find all values 
 for which there exists a real number  such that 

Solving this equation for  we see that we need  to satisfy 

which simplifies to 

Access for free at openstax.org



1.1 • Review of Functions     21

Finally, we obtain 

Since  is a real number if and only if  the range of  is the set 
d. 

In Example 1.7, we can see that  This tells us, in general terms, that the order in which we 
compose functions matters. 

 1.5 Let  Let  Find 

EXAMPLE 1.8 

Composition of Functions Defined by Tables 
Consider the functions  and  described by Table 1.4 and Table 1.5. 

0 1 2 3 4 

0 4 2 4 0 4 

Table 1.4 

0 2 4 

1 0 3 0 5 

Table 1.5 

a. Evaluate 
b. State the domain and range of 
c. Evaluate 
d. State the domain and range of 

Solution 
a. 

b. The domain of  is the set  Since the range of  is the set  the range of 
 is the set 

c. 

d. The domain of  is the set  Since the range of  is the set  the range of 
 is the set 

EXAMPLE 1.9 

Application Involving a Composite Function 
A store is advertising a sale of  off all merchandise. Caroline has a coupon that entitles her to an additional  off 
any item, including sale merchandise. If Caroline decides to purchase an item with an original price of  dollars, how 
much will she end up paying if she applies her coupon to the sale price? Solve this problem by using a composite 



22     1 • Functions and Graphs

function. 

Solution 
Since the sale price is  off the original price, if an item is  dollars, its sale price is given by  Since the 
coupon entitles an individual to  off the price of any item, if an item is  dollars, the price, after applying the coupon, 
is given by  Therefore, if the price is originally  dollars, its sale price will be  and then its final 
price after the coupon will be 

 1.6 If items are on sale for  off their original price, and a customer has a coupon for an additional  off, 
what will be the final price for an item that is originally  dollars, after applying the coupon to the sale 
price? 

Symmetry of Functions 
The graphs of certain functions have symmetry properties that help us understand the function and the shape of its 
graph. For example, consider the function  shown in Figure 1.13(a). If we take the part of the curve 
that lies to the right of the y-axis and flip it over the y-axis, it lays exactly on top of the curve to the left of the y-axis. In 
this case, we say the function has symmetry about the y-axis. On the other hand, consider the function 
shown in Figure 1.13(b). If we take the graph and rotate it  about the origin, the new graph will look exactly the 
same. In this case, we say the function has symmetry about the origin. 

Figure 1.13 (a) A graph that is symmetric about the -axis. (b) A graph that is symmetric about the origin. 
If we are given the graph of a function, it is easy to see whether the graph has one of these symmetry properties. But 
without a graph, how can we determine algebraically whether a function  has symmetry? Looking at Figure 1.13 again, 
we see that since  is symmetric about the -axis, if the point  is on the graph, the point  is on the graph. In 
other words,  If a function  has this property, we say  is an even function, which has symmetry about 
the y-axis. For example,  is even because 

In contrast, looking at Figure 1.13 again, if a function  is symmetric about the origin, then whenever the point  is 
on the graph, the point  is also on the graph. In other words,  If  has this property, we say  is 
an odd function, which has symmetry about the origin. For example,  is odd because 

Definition 

If  for all  in the domain of  then  is an even function. An even function is symmetric about the 

Access for free at openstax.org



1.1 • Review of Functions     23

y-axis. 

If  for all  in the domain of  then  is an odd function. An odd function is symmetric about the 
origin. 

EXAMPLE 1.10 

Even and Odd Functions 
Determine whether each of the following functions is even, odd, or neither. 

a. 
b. 
c. 

Solution 
To determine whether a function is even or odd, we evaluate  and compare it to f(x) and 

a.  Therefore,  is even. 
b.  Now,  Furthermore, noting that 

 we see that  Therefore,  is neither even nor odd. 
c.  Therefore,  is odd. 

 1.7 Determine whether  is even, odd, or neither. 

One symmetric function that arises frequently is the absolute value function, written as  The absolute value 
function is defined as 

(1.2) 

Some students describe this function by stating that it “makes everything positive.” By the definition of the absolute 
value function, we see that if  then  and if  then  However, for 
Therefore, it is more accurate to say that for all nonzero inputs, the output is positive, but if  the output 
We conclude that the range of the absolute value function is  In Figure 1.14, we see that the absolute value 
function is symmetric about the y-axis and is therefore an even function. 

Figure 1.14 The graph of  is symmetric about the -axis. 



24     1 • Functions and Graphs

EXAMPLE 1.11 

Working with the Absolute Value Function 
Find the domain and range of the function 

Solution 
Since the absolute value function is defined for all real numbers, the domain of this function is ∞ ∞  Since 

 for all  the function  Therefore, the range is, at most, the set  To see that 
the range is, in fact, this whole set, we need to show that for  there exists a real number  such that 

A real number  satisfies this equation as long as 

Since  we know  and thus the right-hand side of the equation is nonnegative, so it is possible that there 
is a solution. Furthermore, 

Therefore, we see there are two solutions: 

The range of this function is 

 1.8 For the function  find the domain and range. 

 SECTION 1.1 EXERCISES 
For the following exercises, (a) determine the domain and the range of each relation, and (b) state whether the relation is 
a function. 
1 .  2 .  3 . 

−3 9 1 1 −3 −2 1 1 1 −3 1 1 

−2 4 2 4 −2 −8 2 8 2 −2 2 2 

−1 1 3 9 −1 −1 3 −2 3 −1 3 3 

0 0 0 0 0 0 

Access for free at openstax.org



1.1 • Review of Functions     25

4 .  5 .  6 . 

1 1 5 1 3 3 15 1 −7 11 1 −2 

2 1 6 1 5 2 21 2 −2 5 3 4 

3 1 7 1 8 1 33 3 −2 1 6 11 

4 1 10 0 0 −1 

For the following exercises, find the values for each function, if they exist, then simplify. 

a.  b.  c.  d.  e.  f. 

7 .  8 .  9 . 

10 .  11 .  12 . 

13 . 

For the following exercises, find the domain, range, and all zeros/intercepts, if any, of the functions. 

14 .  15 .  16 . 

17 .  18 .  19 . 

20 .  21 . 

For the following exercises, sketch the graph with the aid of the tables given: 

22 .  23 .  24 . 

−3 10 1 2 −3 −15 1 −3 −3 1 

−2 5 2 5 −2 −12 2 0 −2 0 2 2 

−1 2 3 10 −1 −9 3 3 −1 3 

0 1 0 −6 
0 1 



26     1 • Functions and Graphs

25 .  26 .  27 . 

−3 6 1 2 −3 −9 1 −1 −3 −27 1 1 

−2 4 2 4 −2 −4 2 −4 −2 −8 2 8 

−1 2 3 6 −1 −1 3 −9 −1 −1 3 27 

0 0 0 0 0 0 

For the following exercises, use the vertical line test to determine whether each of the given graphs represents a 
function. Assume that a graph continues at both ends if it extends beyond the given grid. If the graph represents a 
function, then determine the following for each graph: 

a. Domain and range 
b. -intercept, if any (estimate where necessary) 
c. -intercept, if any (estimate where necessary) 
d. The intervals for which the function is increasing 
e. The intervals for which the function is decreasing 
f. The intervals for which the function is constant 

g. Symmetry about any axis and/or the origin 
h. Whether the function is even, odd, or neither 

28 .  29 .  30 . 

31 .  32 .  33 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



1.1 • Review of Functions     27

34 .  35 . 

For the following exercises, for each pair of functions, find a.  b.  c.  d.  Determine the domain of each 
of these new functions. 

36 .  37 .  38 . 

39 .  40 .  41 . 

For the following exercises, for each pair of functions, find a.  and b.  Simplify the results. Find the 
domain of each of the results. 

42 .  43 .  44 . 

45 .  46 .  47 . 



28     1 • Functions and Graphs

48 .  49 . The table below lists the  50 . [T] The area  of a square 
NBA championship depends on the length of 
winners for the years 2001 the side 
to 2012. a. Write a function 

for the area of a square. 
Year Winner b. Find and interpret 

2001 LA Lakers c. Find the exact and the 
two-significant-digit 

2002 LA Lakers approximation to the 
length of the sides of a 
square with area 56 

2003 San Antonio square units. 
Spurs 

2004 Detroit Pistons 

2005 San Antonio 
Spurs 

2006 Miami Heat 

2007 San Antonio 
Spurs 

2008 Boston Celtics 

2009 LA Lakers 

2010 LA Lakers 

2011 Dallas Mavericks 

2012 Miami Heat 

a. Consider the relation in 
which the domain 
values are the years 
2001 to 2012 and the 
range is the 
corresponding winner. 
Is this relation a 
function? Explain why 
or why not. 

b. Consider the relation 
where the domain 
values are the winners 
and the range is the 
corresponding years. Is 
this relation a function? 
Explain why or why not. 

Access for free at openstax.org



1.1 • Review of Functions     29

51 . [T] The volume of a cube  52 . [T] A rental car company  53 . [T] A vehicle has a 20-gal 
depends on the length of rents cars for a flat fee of tank and gets 15 mpg. The 
the sides $20 and an hourly charge number of miles N that can 
a. Write a function of $10.25. Therefore, the be driven depends on the 

for the volume of a total cost  to rent a car is amount of gas x in the 
cube. a function of the hours tank. 

b. Find and interpret the car is rented plus the a. Write a formula that 
flat fee. models this situation. 
a. Write the formula for b. Determine the number 

the function that of miles the vehicle can 
models this situation. travel on (i) a full tank of 

b. Find the total cost to gas and (ii) 3/4 of a tank 
rent a car for 2 days and of gas. 
7 hours. c. Determine the domain 

c. Determine how long the and range of the 
car was rented if the bill function. 
is $430. d. Determine how many 

times the driver had to 
stop for gas if she has 
driven a total of 578 mi. 

54 . [T] The volume V of a  55 . [T] A certain bacterium  56 . [T] An American tourist 
sphere depends on the grows in culture in a visits Paris and must 
length of its radius as circular region. The radius convert U.S. dollars to 

 Because of the circle, measured in Euros, which can be done 
Earth is not a perfect centimeters, is given by using the function 
sphere, we can use the  where x is 
mean radius when where t is time measured the number of U.S. dollars 
measuring from the center in hours since a circle of a and  is the equivalent 
to its surface. The mean 1-cm radius of the number of Euros. Since 
radius is the average bacterium was put into the conversion rates fluctuate, 
distance from the physical culture. when the tourist returns to 
center to the surface, a. Express the area of the the United States 2 weeks 
based on a large number bacteria as a function of later, the conversion from 
of samples. Find the time. Euros to U.S. dollars is 
volume of Earth with mean b. Find the exact and  where x is 
radius  m. approximate area of the the number of Euros and 

bacterial culture in 3  is the equivalent 
hours. number of U.S. dollars. 

c. Express the a. Find the composite 
circumference of the function that converts 
bacteria as a function of directly from U.S. 
time. dollars to U.S. dollars 

d. Find the exact and via Euros. Did this 
approximate tourist lose value in the 
circumference of the conversion process? 
bacteria in 3 hours. b. Use (a) to determine 

how many U.S. dollars 
the tourist would get 
back at the end of her 
trip if she converted an 
extra $200 when she 
arrived in Paris. 



30     1 • Functions and Graphs

57 . [T] The manager at a skateboard  58 . [T] Use a graphing calculator to 
shop pays his workers a monthly graph the half-circle 
salary S of $750 plus a commission  Then, use the 
of $8.50 for each skateboard they INTERCEPT feature to find the value 
sell. of both the - and -intercepts. 
a. Write a function  that 

models a worker’s monthly 
salary based on the number of 
skateboards x he or she sells. 

b. Find the monthly salary when a 
worker sells 25, 40, or 55 
skateboards. 

c. Use the INTERSECT feature on a 
graphing calculator to determine 
the number of skateboards that 
must be sold for a worker to 
earn a monthly income of $1400. 
(Hint: Find the intersection of the 
function and the line 

1.2 Basic Classes of Functions 
Learning Objectives 

1.2.1 Calculate the slope of a linear function and interpret its meaning. 
1.2.2 Recognize the degree of a polynomial. 
1.2.3 Find the roots of a quadratic polynomial. 
1.2.4 Describe the graphs of basic odd and even polynomial functions. 
1.2.5 Identify a rational function. 
1.2.6 Describe the graphs of power and root functions. 
1.2.7 Explain the difference between algebraic and transcendental functions. 
1.2.8 Graph a piecewise-defined function. 
1.2.9 Sketch the graph of a function that has been shifted, stretched, or reflected from its initial graph 

position. 
We have studied the general characteristics of functions, so now let’s examine some specific classes of functions. We 
begin by reviewing the basic properties of linear and quadratic functions, and then generalize to include higher-degree 
polynomials. By combining root functions with polynomials, we can define general algebraic functions and distinguish 
them from the transcendental functions we examine later in this chapter. We finish the section with examples of 
piecewise-defined functions and take a look at how to sketch the graph of a function that has been shifted, stretched, or 
reflected from its initial form. 

Linear Functions and Slope 
The easiest type of function to consider is a linear function. Linear functions have the form  where  and 

 are constants. In Figure 1.15, we see examples of linear functions when  is positive, negative, and zero. Note that if 
 the graph of the line rises as  increases. In other words,  is increasing on  If  the 

graph of the line falls as  increases. In this case,  is decreasing on  If  the line is horizontal. 

Access for free at openstax.org



1.2 • Basic Classes of Functions     31

Figure 1.15 These linear functions are increasing or decreasing on  and one function is a horizontal line. 
As suggested by Figure 1.15, the graph of any linear function is a line. One of the distinguishing features of a line is its 
slope. The slope is the change in  for each unit change in  The slope measures both the steepness and the direction 
of a line. If the slope is positive, the line points upward when moving from left to right. If the slope is negative, the line 
points downward when moving from left to right. If the slope is zero, the line is horizontal. To calculate the slope of a 
line, we need to determine the ratio of the change in  versus the change in  To do so, we choose any two points 

 and  on the line and calculate  In Figure 1.16, we see this ratio is independent of the points 
chosen. 

Figure 1.16 For any linear function, the slope  is independent of the choice of points  and 
 on the line. 

Definition 

Consider line  passing through points  and  Let  and  denote the 
changes in  and  respectively. The slope of the line is 

(1.3) 

We now examine the relationship between slope and the formula for a linear function. Consider the linear function given 
by the formula  As discussed earlier, we know the graph of a linear function is given by a line. We can use 
our definition of slope to calculate the slope of this line. As shown, we can determine the slope by calculating 

 for any points  and  on the line. Evaluating the function  at  we see that 



32     1 • Functions and Graphs

is a point on this line. Evaluating this function at  we see that  is also a point on this line. Therefore, the 
slope of this line is 

We have shown that the coefficient  is the slope of the line. We can conclude that the formula  describes a 
line with slope  Furthermore, because this line intersects the -axis at the point  we see that the -intercept for 
this linear function is  We conclude that the formula  tells us the slope,  and the -intercept, 
for this line. Since we often use the symbol  to denote the slope of a line, we can write 

to denote the slope-intercept form of a linear function. 
Sometimes it is convenient to express a linear function in different ways. For example, suppose the graph of a linear 
function passes through the point  and the slope of the line is  Since any other point  on the graph of 

 must satisfy the equation 

this linear function can be expressed by writing 

We call this equation the point-slope equation for that linear function. 
Since every nonvertical line is the graph of a linear function, the points on a nonvertical line can be described using the 
slope-intercept or point-slope equations. However, a vertical line does not represent the graph of a function and cannot 
be expressed in either of these forms. Instead, a vertical line is described by the equation  for some constant 
Since neither the slope-intercept form nor the point-slope form allows for vertical lines, we use the notation 

where  are both not zero, to denote the standard form of a line. 

Definition 

Consider a line passing through the point  with slope  The equation 

(1.4) 

is the point-slope equation for that line. 

Consider a line with slope  and -intercept  The equation 

(1.5) 

is an equation for that line in slope-intercept form. 

The standard form of a line is given by the equation 

(1.6) 

where  and  are not both zero. This form is more general because it allows for a vertical line, 

EXAMPLE 1.12 

Finding the Slope and Equations of Lines 
Consider the line passing through the points  and  as shown in Figure 1.17. 

Access for free at openstax.org



1.2 • Basic Classes of Functions     33

Figure 1.17 Finding the equation of a linear function with a graph that is a line between two given points. 
a. Find the slope of the line. 
b. Find an equation for this linear function in point-slope form. 
c. Find an equation for this linear function in slope-intercept form. 

Solution 
a. The slope of the line is 

b. To find an equation for the linear function in point-slope form, use the slope  and choose any point on the 
line. If we choose the point  we get the equation 

c. To find an equation for the linear function in slope-intercept form, solve the equation in part b. for  When we 
do this, we get the equation 

 1.9 Consider the line passing through points  and  Find the slope of the line. 

Find an equation of that line in point-slope form. Find an equation of that line in slope-intercept form. 

EXAMPLE 1.13 

A Linear Distance Function 
Jessica leaves her house at 5:50 a.m. and goes for a 9-mile run. She returns to her house at 7:08 a.m. Answer the 
following questions, assuming Jessica runs at a constant pace. 
a. Describe the distance  (in miles) Jessica runs as a linear function of her run time  (in minutes). 
b. Sketch a graph of 
c. Interpret the meaning of the slope. 

Solution 
a. At time  Jessica is at her house, so  At time  minutes, Jessica has finished running  mi, so 

 The slope of the linear function is 



34     1 • Functions and Graphs

The -intercept is  so the equation for this linear function is 

b. To graph  use the fact that the graph passes through the origin and has slope 

c. The slope  describes the distance (in miles) Jessica runs per minute, or her average velocity. 

Polynomials 
A linear function is a special type of a more general class of functions: polynomials. A polynomial function is any 
function that can be written in the form 

(1.7) 

for some integer  and constants  where  In the case when  we allow for  if 
 the function  is called the zero function. The value  is called the degree of the polynomial; the constant 

 is called the leading coefficient. A linear function of the form  is a polynomial of degree 1 if  and 
degree 0 if  A polynomial of degree 0 is also called a constant function. A polynomial function of degree 2 is called 
a quadratic function. In particular, a quadratic function has the form  where  A polynomial 
function of degree  is called a cubic function. 

Power Functions 
Some polynomial functions are power functions. A power function is any function of the form  where  and 

 are any real numbers. The exponent in a power function can be any real number, but here we consider the case when 
the exponent is a positive integer. (We consider other cases later.) If the exponent is a positive integer, then  is 
a polynomial. If  is even, then  is an even function because  if  is even. If  is odd, 
then  is an odd function because  if  is odd (Figure 1.18). 

Access for free at openstax.org



1.2 • Basic Classes of Functions     35

Figure 1.18 (a) For any even integer  is an even function. (b) For any odd integer  is an odd 
function. 

Behavior at Infinity 
To determine the behavior of a function  as the inputs approach infinity, we look at the values  as the inputs, 
become larger. For some functions, the values of  approach a finite number. For example, for the function 

 the values  become closer and closer to zero for all values of  as they get larger and larger. For this 
function, we say  approaches two as  goes to infinity,” and we write  as ∞  The line  is a 
horizontal asymptote for the function  because the graph of the function gets closer to the line as  gets 
larger. 
For other functions, the values  may not approach a finite number but instead may become larger for all values of 
as they get larger. In that case, we say  approaches infinity as  approaches infinity,” and we write ∞  as 

∞  For example, for the function  the outputs  become larger as the inputs  get larger. We can 
conclude that the function  approaches infinity as  approaches infinity, and we write ∞  as ∞
The behavior as ∞  and the meaning of ∞  as ∞  or ∞  can be defined similarly. We can 
describe what happens to the values of  as ∞  and as ∞  as the end behavior of the function. 

To understand the end behavior for polynomial functions, we can focus on quadratic and cubic functions. The behavior 
for higher-degree polynomials can be analyzed similarly. Consider a quadratic function  If 
the values ∞  as ∞  If  the values  as ∞  Since the graph of a quadratic function 
is a parabola, the parabola opens upward if  the parabola opens downward if  (See Figure 1.19(a).) 

Now consider a cubic function  If  then ∞  as ∞  and  as 
 If  then  as ∞  and ∞  as  As we can see from both of these graphs, 

the leading term of the polynomial determines the end behavior. (See Figure 1.19(b).) 



36     1 • Functions and Graphs

Figure 1.19 (a) For a quadratic function, if the leading coefficient  the parabola opens upward. If  the 
parabola opens downward. (b) For a cubic function  if the leading coefficient  the values ∞  as ∞
and the values  as  If the leading coefficient  the opposite is true. 

Zeros of Polynomial Functions 
Another characteristic of the graph of a polynomial function is where it intersects the -axis. To determine where a 
function  intersects the -axis, we need to solve the equation  for x. In the case of the linear function 

 the -intercept is given by solving the equation  In this case, we see that the -intercept is 
given by  In the case of a quadratic function, finding the -intercept(s) requires finding the zeros of a quadratic 
equation:  In some cases, it is easy to factor the polynomial  to find the zeros. If not, we 
make use of the quadratic formula. 

Rule: The Quadratic Formula 

Consider the quadratic equation 

where  The solutions of this equation are given by the quadratic formula 

(1.8) 

If the discriminant  this formula tells us there are two real numbers that satisfy the quadratic equation. 
If  this formula tells us there is only one solution, and it is a real number. If  no real 
numbers satisfy the quadratic equation. 

In the case of higher-degree polynomials, it may be more complicated to determine where the graph intersects the 
-axis. In some instances, it is possible to find the -intercepts by factoring the polynomial to find its zeros. In other 

cases, it is impossible to calculate the exact values of the -intercepts. However, as we see later in the text, in cases such 
as this, we can use analytical tools to approximate (to a very high degree) where the -intercepts are located. Here we 
focus on the graphs of polynomials for which we can calculate their zeros explicitly. 

EXAMPLE 1.14 

Graphing Polynomial Functions 
For the following functions a. and b., i. describe the behavior of  as ∞  ii. find all zeros of  and iii. sketch a 

Access for free at openstax.org



1.2 • Basic Classes of Functions     37

graph of 

a. 
b. 

Solution 
a. The function  is a quadratic function. 

i. Because ∞
ii. To find the zeros of  use the quadratic formula. The zeros are 

iii. To sketch the graph of  use the information from your previous answers and combine it with the fact that the 
graph is a parabola opening downward. 

b. The function  is a cubic function. 
i. Because ∞ ∞  As 
ii. To find the zeros of  we need to factor the polynomial. First, when we factor  out of all the terms, we find 

Then, when we factor the quadratic function  we find 

Therefore, the zeros of  are 
iii. Combining the results from parts i. and ii., draw a rough sketch of 



38     1 • Functions and Graphs

 1.10 Consider the quadratic function  Find the zeros of  Does the parabola open upward 
or downward? 

Mathematical Models 
A large variety of real-world situations can be described using mathematical models. A mathematical model is a 
method of simulating real-life situations with mathematical equations. Physicists, engineers, economists, and other 
researchers develop models by combining observation with quantitative data to develop equations, functions, graphs, 
and other mathematical tools to describe the behavior of various systems accurately. Models are useful because they 
help predict future outcomes. Examples of mathematical models include the study of population dynamics, 
investigations of weather patterns, and predictions of product sales. 
As an example, let’s consider a mathematical model that a company could use to describe its revenue for the sale of a 
particular item. The amount of revenue  a company receives for the sale of  items sold at a price of  dollars per item 
is described by the equation  The company is interested in how the sales change as the price of the item 
changes. Suppose the data in Table 1.6 show the number of units a company sells as a function of the price per item. 

Table 1.6 Number of Units Sold  (in Thousands) 
as a Function of Price per Unit  (in Dollars) 

In Figure 1.20, we see the graph the number of units sold (in thousands) as a function of price (in dollars). We note from 
the shape of the graph that the number of units sold is likely a linear function of price per item, and the data can be 
closely approximated by the linear function  for  where  predicts the number of units sold 

Access for free at openstax.org



1.2 • Basic Classes of Functions     39

in thousands. Using this linear function, the revenue (in thousands of dollars) can be estimated by the quadratic function 

for  In Example 1.15, we use this quadratic function to predict the amount of revenue the company receives 
depending on the price the company charges per item. Note that we cannot conclude definitively the actual number of 
units sold for values of  for which no data are collected. However, given the other data values and the graph shown, it 
seems reasonable that the number of units sold (in thousands) if the price charged is  dollars may be close to the 
values predicted by the linear function 

Figure 1.20 The data collected for the number of items sold as a function of price is roughly linear. We use the linear 
function  to estimate this function. 

EXAMPLE 1.15 

Maximizing Revenue 
A company is interested in predicting the amount of revenue it will receive depending on the price it charges for a 
particular item. Using the data from Table 1.6, the company arrives at the following quadratic function to model revenue 

 (in thousands of dollars) as a function of price per item 

for 
a. Predict the revenue if the company sells the item at a price of  and 
b. Find the zeros of this function and interpret the meaning of the zeros. 
c. Sketch a graph of 
d. Use the graph to determine the value of  that maximizes revenue. Find the maximum revenue. 

Solution 
a. Evaluating the revenue function at  and  we can conclude that 



40     1 • Functions and Graphs

b. The zeros of this function can be found by solving the equation  When we factor the quadratic 
expression, we get  The solutions to this equation are given by  For these values of 
the revenue is zero. When  the revenue is zero because the company is giving away its merchandise for free. 
When  the revenue is zero because the price is too high, and no one will buy any items. 

c. Knowing the fact that the function is quadratic, we also know the graph is a parabola. Since the leading coefficient is 
negative, the parabola opens downward. One property of parabolas is that they are symmetric about the axis, so 
since the zeros are at  and  the parabola must be symmetric about the line halfway between them, or 

d. The function is a parabola with zeros at  and  and it is symmetric about the line  so the 
maximum revenue occurs at a price of  per item. At that price, the revenue is 

Algebraic Functions 
By allowing for quotients and fractional powers in polynomial functions, we create a larger class of functions. An 
algebraic function is one that involves addition, subtraction, multiplication, division, rational powers, and roots. Two 
types of algebraic functions are rational functions and root functions. 
Just as rational numbers are quotients of integers, rational functions are quotients of polynomials. In particular, a 
rational function is any function of the form  where  and  are polynomials. For example, 

are rational functions. A root function is a power function of the form  where  is a positive integer greater 
than one. For example,  is the square-root function and  is the cube-root function. 
By allowing for compositions of root functions and rational functions, we can create other algebraic functions. For 
example,  is an algebraic function. 

Access for free at openstax.org



1.2 • Basic Classes of Functions     41

EXAMPLE 1.16 

Finding Domain and Range for Algebraic Functions 
For each of the following functions, find the domain and range. 

a. 
b. 

Solution 
a. It is not possible to divide by zero, so the domain is the set of real numbers  such that  To find the range, 

we need to find the values  for which there exists a real number  such that 

When we multiply both sides of this equation by  we see that  must satisfy the equation 

From this equation, we can see that  must satisfy 

If  this equation has no solution. On the other hand, as long as 

satisfies this equation. We can conclude that the range of  is 
b. To find the domain of , we need to identify values of  with . Note that  when  or 

. Solving  is equivalent to solving . If this inequality is true, then both factors are 
positive or both are negative. 
Case 1: Both factors are positive. 

So, the expression  is positive for all values in the interval . 
Case 2: Both factors are negative. 

There is no value of  that can satisfy both inequalities. 
The domain of the function is . 

To identify the range, note that if , then . Therefore, . The range of  is 
. 

 1.11 Find the domain and range for the function 

The root functions  have defining characteristics depending on whether  is odd or even. For all even 
integers  the domain of  is the interval ∞  For all odd integers  the domain of  is 
the set of all real numbers. Since  for odd integers  is an odd function if  is odd. See the 
graphs of root functions for different values of  in Figure 1.21. 



42     1 • Functions and Graphs

Figure 1.21 (a) If  is even, the domain of  is ∞  (b) If  is odd, the domain of  is ∞
and the function  is an odd function. 

EXAMPLE 1.17 

Finding Domains for Algebraic Functions 
For each of the following functions, determine the domain of the function. 

a. 
b. 
c. 
d. 

Solution 
a. You cannot divide by zero, so the domain is the set of values  such that  Therefore, the domain is 

b. You need to determine the values of  for which the denominator is zero. Since  for all real numbers 
the denominator is never zero. Therefore, the domain is ∞

c. Since the square root of a negative number is not a real number, the domain is the set of values  for which 
 Therefore, the domain is 

d. The cube root is defined for all real numbers, so the domain is the interval 

 1.12 Find the domain for each of the following functions:  and 

Transcendental Functions 
Thus far, we have discussed algebraic functions. Some functions, however, cannot be described by basic algebraic 
operations. These functions are known as transcendental functions because they are said to “transcend,” or go beyond, 
algebra. The most common transcendental functions are trigonometric, exponential, and logarithmic functions. A 
trigonometric function relates the ratios of two sides of a right triangle. They are 
(We discuss trigonometric functions later in the chapter.) An exponential function is a function of the form 
where the base  A logarithmic function is a function of the form  for some constant 

 where  if and only if  (We also discuss exponential and logarithmic functions later in the 
chapter.) 

EXAMPLE 1.18 

Classifying Algebraic and Transcendental Functions 
Classify each of the following functions, a. through c., as algebraic or transcendental. 

Access for free at openstax.org



1.2 • Basic Classes of Functions     43

a. 
b. 
c. 

Solution 
a. Since this function involves basic algebraic operations only, it is an algebraic function. 
b. This function cannot be written as a formula that involves only basic algebraic operations, so it is transcendental. 

(Note that algebraic functions can only have powers that are rational numbers.) 
c. As in part b., this function cannot be written using a formula involving basic algebraic operations only; therefore, 

this function is transcendental. 

 1.13 Is  an algebraic or a transcendental function? 

Piecewise-Defined Functions 
Sometimes a function is defined by different formulas on different parts of its domain. A function with this property is 
known as a piecewise-defined function. The absolute value function is an example of a piecewise-defined function 
because the formula changes with the sign of 

Other piecewise-defined functions may be represented by completely different formulas, depending on the part of the 
domain in which a point falls. To graph a piecewise-defined function, we graph each part of the function in its respective 
domain, on the same coordinate system. If the formula for a function is different for  and  we need to pay 
special attention to what happens at  when we graph the function. Sometimes the graph needs to include an open 
or closed circle to indicate the value of the function at  We examine this in the next example. 

EXAMPLE 1.19 

Graphing a Piecewise-Defined Function 
Sketch a graph of the following piecewise-defined function: 

Solution 
Graph the linear function  on the interval  and graph the quadratic function  on the interval 

∞  Since the value of the function at  is given by the formula  we see that  To 
indicate this on the graph, we draw a closed circle at the point  The value of the function is given by 
for all  but not at  To indicate this on the graph, we draw an open circle at 



44     1 • Functions and Graphs

Figure 1.22 This piecewise-defined function is linear for  and quadratic for 

 1.14 Sketch a graph of the function 

EXAMPLE 1.20 

Parking Fees Described by a Piecewise-Defined Function 
In a big city, drivers are charged variable rates for parking in a parking garage. They are charged $10 for the first hour or 
any part of the first hour and an additional $2 for each hour or part thereof up to a maximum of $30 for the day. The 
parking garage is open from 6 a.m. to 12 midnight. 
a. Write a piecewise-defined function that describes the cost  to park in the parking garage as a function of hours 

parked 
b. Sketch a graph of this function 

Solution 
a. Since the parking garage is open 18 hours each day, the domain for this function is  The cost to 

park a car at this parking garage can be described piecewise by the function 

b. The graph of the function consists of several horizontal line segments. 

Access for free at openstax.org



1.2 • Basic Classes of Functions     45

 1.15 The cost of mailing a letter is a function of the weight of the letter. Suppose the cost of mailing a letter is 
 for the first ounce and  for each additional ounce. Write a piecewise-defined function describing 

the cost  as a function of the weight  for  where  is measured in cents and  is measured in 
ounces. 

Transformations of Functions 
We have seen several cases in which we have added, subtracted, or multiplied constants to form variations of simple 
functions. In the previous example, for instance, we subtracted 2 from the argument of the function  to get the 
function  This subtraction represents a shift of the function  two units to the right. A shift, 
horizontally or vertically, is a type of transformation of a function. Other transformations include horizontal and 
vertical scalings, and reflections about the axes. 
A vertical shift of a function occurs if we add or subtract the same constant to each output  For  the graph of 

 is a shift of the graph of  up  units, whereas the graph of  is a shift of the graph of  down 
units. For example, the graph of the function  is the graph of  shifted up  units; the graph of the 
function  is the graph of  shifted down  units (Figure 1.23). 



46     1 • Functions and Graphs

Figure 1.23 (a) For  the graph of  is a vertical shift up  units of the graph of  (b) For 
the graph of  is a vertical shift down  units of the graph of 
A horizontal shift of a function occurs if we add or subtract the same constant to each input  For  the graph of 

 is a shift of the graph of  to the left  units; the graph of  is a shift of the graph of  to the right 
units. Why does the graph shift left when adding a constant and shift right when subtracting a constant? To answer this 
question, let’s look at an example. 
Consider the function  and evaluate this function at  Since  and  the graph 
of  is the graph of  shifted left 3 units. Similarly, the graph of  is the graph of 
shifted right  units (Figure 1.24). 

Figure 1.24 (a) For  the graph of  is a horizontal shift left  units of the graph of  (b) For 
the graph of  is a horizontal shift right  units of the graph of 
A vertical scaling of a graph occurs if we multiply all outputs  of a function by the same positive constant. For  the 
graph of the function  is the graph of  scaled vertically by a factor of  If  the values of the outputs for 
the function  are larger than the values of the outputs for the function  therefore, the graph has been 
stretched vertically. If  then the outputs of the function  are smaller, so the graph has been compressed. 
For example, the graph of the function  is the graph of  stretched vertically by a factor of 3, whereas 
the graph of  is the graph of  compressed vertically by a factor of  (Figure 1.25). 

Access for free at openstax.org



1.2 • Basic Classes of Functions     47

Figure 1.25 (a) If  the graph of  is a vertical stretch of the graph of  (b) If  the graph of 
 is a vertical compression of the graph of 

The horizontal scaling of a function occurs if we multiply the inputs  by the same positive constant. For  the graph 
of the function  is the graph of  scaled horizontally by a factor of  If  the graph of  is the graph of 

 compressed horizontally. If  the graph of  is the graph of  stretched horizontally. For example, 
consider the function  and evaluate  at  Since  the graph of  is the graph of 

 compressed horizontally. The graph of  is a horizontal stretch of the graph of  (Figure 1.26). 

Figure 1.26 (a) If  the graph of  is a horizontal compression of the graph of  (b) If  the 
graph of  is a horizontal stretch of the graph of 
We have explored what happens to the graph of a function  when we multiply  by a constant  to get a new 
function  We have also discussed what happens to the graph of a function  when we multiply the independent 
variable  by  to get a new function  However, we have not addressed what happens to the graph of the 
function if the constant  is negative. If we have a constant  we can write c as a positive number multiplied by 
but, what kind of transformation do we get when we multiply the function or its argument by  When we multiply all 
the outputs by  we get a reflection about the -axis. When we multiply all inputs by  we get a reflection about the 

-axis. For example, the graph of  is the graph of  reflected about the -axis. The graph of 
 is the graph of  reflected about the -axis (Figure 1.27). 



48     1 • Functions and Graphs

Figure 1.27 (a) The graph of  is the graph of  reflected about the -axis. (b) The graph of  is 
the graph of  reflected about the 

-axis. 
If the graph of a function consists of more than one transformation of another graph, it is important to transform the 
graph in the correct order. Given a function  the graph of the related function  can be obtained 
from the graph of  by performing the transformations in the following order. 
1. Horizontal shift of the graph of  If  shift left. If  shift right. 
2. Horizontal scaling of the graph of  by a factor of  If  reflect the graph about the -axis. 
3. Vertical scaling of the graph of  by a factor of  If  reflect the graph about the -axis. 
4. Vertical shift of the graph of  If  shift up. If  shift down. 

We can summarize the different transformations and their related effects on the graph of a function in the following 
table. 

Transformation of Effect on the graph of 

Vertical shift up  units 

Vertical shift down  units 

Shift left by  units 

Shift right by  units 

Vertical stretch if 
vertical compression if 

Horizontal stretch if  horizontal compression if 

Reflection about the -axis 

Reflection about the -axis 

Table 1.7 Transformations of Functions 

Access for free at openstax.org



1.2 • Basic Classes of Functions     49

EXAMPLE 1.21 

Transforming a Function 
For each of the following functions, a. and b., sketch a graph by using a sequence of transformations of a well-known 
function. 
a. 
b. 

Solution 
a. Starting with the graph of  shift  units to the left, reflect about the -axis, and then shift down 3 units. 

Figure 1.28 The function  can be viewed as a sequence of three transformations of the function 

b. Starting with the graph of  reflect about the -axis, stretch the graph vertically by a factor of 3, and move up 
1 unit. 

Figure 1.29 The function  can be viewed as a sequence of three transformations of the function 



50     1 • Functions and Graphs

 1.16 Describe how the function  can be graphed using the graph of  and a 
sequence of transformations. 

 SECTION 1.2 EXERCISES 
For the following exercises, for each pair of points, a. find the slope of the line passing through the points and b. indicate 
whether the line is increasing, decreasing, horizontal, or vertical. 
59 .  and  60 .  and  61 .  and 
62 .  and  63 .  and  64 .  and 
65 .  and  66 .  and 

For the following exercises, write the equation of the line satisfying the given conditions in slope-intercept form. 

67 . Slope  passes  68 . Slope  passes through  69 . Slope  passes through 
through 

70 . Slope -intercept  71 . Passing through  and  72 . Passing through 
and 

73 . -intercept  and  74 . -intercept  and 
-intercept -intercept 

For the following exercises, for each linear equation, a. give the slope  and -intercept b, if any, and b. graph the line. 

75 .  76 .  77 . 

78 .  79 .  80 . 
81 .  82 . 

For the following exercises, for each polynomial, a. find the degree; b. find the zeros, if any; c. find the -intercept(s), if 
any; d. use the leading coefficient to determine the graph’s end behavior; and e. determine algebraically whether the 
polynomial is even, odd, or neither. 

83 .  84 .  85 . 

86 .  87 . 

For the following exercises, use the graph of  to graph each transformed function 

88 .  89 . 

For the following exercises, use the graph of  to graph each transformed function 

90 .  91 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



1.2 • Basic Classes of Functions     51

For the following exercises, use the graph of  to graph each transformed function 

 92 . 
93 . 

For the following exercises, for each of the piecewise-defined functions, a. evaluate at the given values of the 
independent variable and b. sketch the graph. 

94 .  95 . 

96 .  97 . 

For the following exercises, determine whether the statement is true or false. Explain why. 

98 .  is  99 .  is an odd root  100 . A logarithmic function is 
a transcendental function. function an algebraic function. 

101. A function of the form  102 . The domain of an even  103 . [T] A company purchases 
 where  is a root function is all real some computer 

real valued constant, is an numbers. equipment for $20,500. At 
exponential function. the end of a 3-year 

period, the value of the 
equipment has decreased 
linearly to $12,300. 
a. Find a function 

 that 
determines the value V 
of the equipment at 
the end of t years. 

b. Find and interpret the 
meaning of the - and 

-intercepts for this 
situation. 

c. What is the value of 
the equipment at the 
end of 5 years? 

d. When will the value of 
the equipment be 
$3000? 



52     1 • Functions and Graphs

104. [T] Total online shopping  105 . [T] A family bakery makes  106 . [T] A house purchased for 
during the Christmas cupcakes and sells them $250,000 is expected to 
holidays has increased at local outdoor festivals. be worth twice its 
dramatically during the For a music festival, there purchase price in 18 
past 5 years. In 2012 is a fixed cost of $125 to years. 

 total online set up a cupcake stand. a. Find a linear function 
holiday sales were $42.3 The owner estimates that that models the price 
billion, whereas in 2013 it costs $0.75 to make P of the house versus 
they were $48.1 billion. each cupcake. The owner the number of years t 
a. Find a linear function S is interested in since the original 

that estimates the determining the total cost purchase. 
total online holiday  as a function of b. Interpret the slope of 
sales in the year t. number of cupcakes the graph of P. 

b. Interpret the slope of made. c. Find the price of the 
the graph of S. a. Find a linear function house 15 years from 

c. Use part a. to predict that relates cost C to x, when it was originally 
the year when online the number of purchased. 
shopping during cupcakes made. 
Christmas will reach b. Find the cost to bake 
$60 billion. 160 cupcakes. 

c. If the owner sells the 
cupcakes for $1.50 
apiece, how many 
cupcakes does she 
need to sell to start 
making profit? (Hint: 
Use the INTERSECTION 
function on a 
calculator to find this 
number.) 

107. [T] A car was purchased  108 . [T] A condominium in an  109 . [T] The total cost C to 
for $26,000. The value of upscale part of the city produce a certain item is 
the car depreciates by was purchased for modeled by the function 
$1500 per year. $432,000. In 35 years it is 
a. Find a linear function worth $60,500. Find the where x is the number of 

that models the value rate of depreciation. items produced. 
V of the car after t Determine the cost to 
years. produce 175 items. 

b. Find and interpret 

Access for free at openstax.org



1.3 • Trigonometric Functions     53

110. [T] A professor asks her  111 . [T] The output (as a  112 . [T] The admissions office 
class to report the percent of total capacity) at a public university 
amount of time t they of nuclear power plants in estimates that 65% of the 
spent writing two the United States can be students offered 
assignments. Most modeled by the function admission to the class of 
students report that it 2019 will actually enroll. 
takes them about 45 where t is time in years a. Find the linear 
minutes to type a four- and  corresponds to function 
page assignment and the beginning of 2000. where  is the 
about 1.5 hours to type a Use the model to predict number of students 
nine-page assignment. the approximate that actually enroll and 
a. Find the linear percentage output at the  is the number of all 

function  that beginning of 2015. students offered 
models this situation, admission to the class 
where  is the of 2019. 
number of pages b. If the university wants 
typed and t is the time the 2019 freshman 
in minutes. class size to be 1350, 

b. Use part a. to determine how many 
determine how many students should be 
pages can be typed in offered admission. 
2 hours. 

c. Use part a. to 
determine how long it 
takes to type a 
20-page assignment. 

1.3 Trigonometric Functions 
Learning Objectives 

1.3.1 Convert angle measures between degrees and radians. 
1.3.2 Recognize the triangular and circular definitions of the basic trigonometric functions. 
1.3.3 Write the basic trigonometric identities. 
1.3.4 Identify the graphs and periods of the trigonometric functions. 
1.3.5 Describe the shift of a sine or cosine graph from the equation of the function. 

Trigonometric functions are used to model many phenomena, including sound waves, vibrations of strings, alternating 
electrical current, and the motion of pendulums. In fact, almost any repetitive, or cyclical, motion can be modeled by 
some combination of trigonometric functions. In this section, we define the six basic trigonometric functions and look at 
some of the main identities involving these functions. 

Radian Measure 
To use trigonometric functions, we first must understand how to measure the angles. Although we can use both radians 
and degrees, radians are a more natural measurement because they are related directly to the unit circle, a circle with 
radius 1. The radian measure of an angle is defined as follows. Given an angle  let  be the length of the corresponding 
arc on the unit circle (Figure 1.30). We say the angle corresponding to the arc of length 1 has radian measure 1. 

Figure 1.30 The radian measure of an angle  is the arc length  of the associated arc on the unit circle. 



54     1 • Functions and Graphs

Since an angle of  corresponds to the circumference of a circle, or an arc of length  we conclude that an angle 
with a degree measure of  has a radian measure of  Similarly, we see that  is equivalent to  radians. Table 
1.8 shows the relationship between common degree and radian values. 

Degrees Radians Degrees Radians 

0 0 120 

30 135 

45 150 

60 180 

90 

Table 1.8 Common Angles Expressed in 
Degrees and Radians 

EXAMPLE 1.22 

Converting between Radians and Degrees 
a. Express  using radians. 
b. Express  rad using degrees. 

Solution 
Use the fact that  is equivalent to  radians as a conversion factor: 

a.  rad 
b.  rad = 

 1.17 Express  using radians. Express  rad using degrees. 

The Six Basic Trigonometric Functions 
Trigonometric functions allow us to use angle measures, in radians or degrees, to find the coordinates of a point on any 
circle—not only on a unit circle—or to find an angle given a point on a circle. They also define the relationship among the 
sides and angles of a triangle. 
To define the trigonometric functions, first consider the unit circle centered at the origin and a point  on the 
unit circle. Let  be an angle with an initial side that lies along the positive -axis and with a terminal side that is the line 
segment  An angle in this position is said to be in standard position (Figure 1.31). We can then define the values of 
the six trigonometric functions for  in terms of the coordinates  and 

Access for free at openstax.org



1.3 • Trigonometric Functions     55

Figure 1.31 The angle  is in standard position. The values of the trigonometric functions for  are defined in terms of 
the coordinates  and 

Definition 

Let  be a point on the unit circle centered at the origin  Let  be an angle with an initial side along the 
positive -axis and a terminal side given by the line segment  The trigonometric functions are then defined as 

(1.9) 

If  and  are undefined. If  then  and  are undefined. 

We can see that for a point  on a circle of radius  with a corresponding angle  the coordinates  and  satisfy 

The values of the other trigonometric functions can be expressed in terms of  and  (Figure 1.32). 

Figure 1.32 For a point  on a circle of radius  the coordinates  and  satisfy  and 
Table 1.9 shows the values of sine and cosine at the major angles in the first quadrant. From this table, we can determine 
the values of sine and cosine at the corresponding angles in the other quadrants. The values of the other trigonometric 
functions are calculated easily from the values of  and 



56     1 • Functions and Graphs

Table 1.9 Values of 
 and  at 

Major Angles  in 
the First Quadrant 

EXAMPLE 1.23 

Evaluating Trigonometric Functions 
Evaluate each of the following expressions. 

a. 
b. 
c. 

Solution 
a. On the unit circle, the angle  corresponds to the point  Therefore, 

b. An angle  corresponds to a revolution in the negative direction, as shown. Therefore, 

Access for free at openstax.org



1.3 • Trigonometric Functions     57

c. An angle  Therefore, this angle corresponds to more than one revolution, as shown. Knowing 

the fact that an angle of  corresponds to the point  we can conclude that 

 1.18 Evaluate  and 

As mentioned earlier, the ratios of the side lengths of a right triangle can be expressed in terms of the trigonometric 
functions evaluated at either of the acute angles of the triangle. Let  be one of the acute angles. Let  be the length of 
the adjacent leg,  be the length of the opposite leg, and  be the length of the hypotenuse. By inscribing the triangle 
into a circle of radius  as shown in Figure 1.33, we see that  and  satisfy the following relationships with 

Figure 1.33 By inscribing a right triangle in a circle, we can express the ratios of the side lengths in terms of the 
trigonometric functions evaluated at 



58     1 • Functions and Graphs

EXAMPLE 1.24 

Constructing a Wooden Ramp 
A wooden ramp is to be built with one end on the ground and the other end at the top of a short staircase. If the top of 
the staircase is  ft from the ground and the angle between the ground and the ramp is to be  how long does the 
ramp need to be? 

Solution 
Let  denote the length of the ramp. In the following image, we see that  needs to satisfy the equation 
Solving this equation for  we see that  ft. 

 1.19 A house painter wants to lean a -ft ladder against a house. If the angle between the base of the ladder 
and the ground is to be  how far from the house should she place the base of the ladder? 

Trigonometric Identities 
A trigonometric identity is an equation involving trigonometric functions that is true for all angles  for which the 
functions are defined. We can use the identities to help us solve or simplify equations. The main trigonometric identities 
are listed next. 

Rule: Trigonometric Identities 

Reciprocal identities 

Pythagorean identities 

Addition and subtraction formulas 

Double-angle formulas 

EXAMPLE 1.25 

Solving Trigonometric Equations 
For each of the following equations, use a trigonometric identity to find all solutions. 
a. 
b. 

Solution 
a. Using the double-angle formula for  we see that  is a solution of 

if and only if 

Access for free at openstax.org



1.3 • Trigonometric Functions     59

which is true if and only if 

To solve this equation, it is important to note that we need to factor the left-hand side and not divide both sides of 
the equation by  The problem with dividing by  is that it is possible that  is zero. In fact, if we did 
divide both sides of the equation by  we would miss some of the solutions of the original equation. Factoring 
the left-hand side of the equation, we see that  is a solution of this equation if and only if 

Since  when 

and  when 

we conclude that the set of solutions to this equation is 

b. Using the double-angle formula for  and the reciprocal identity for  the equation can be written as 

To solve this equation, we multiply both sides by  to eliminate the denominator, and say that if  satisfies this 
equation, then  satisfies the equation 

However, we need to be a little careful here. Even if  satisfies this new equation, it may not satisfy the original 
equation because, to satisfy the original equation, we would need to be able to divide both sides of the equation by 

 However, if  we cannot divide both sides of the equation by  Therefore, it is possible that we 
may arrive at extraneous solutions. So, at the end, it is important to check for extraneous solutions. Returning to the 
equation, it is important that we factor  out of both terms on the left-hand side instead of dividing both sides of 
the equation by  Factoring the left-hand side of the equation, we can rewrite this equation as 

Therefore, the solutions are given by the angles  such that  or  The solutions of the first 
equation are  The solutions of the second equation are  After 
checking for extraneous solutions, the set of solutions to the equation is 

 1.20 Find all solutions to the equation 

EXAMPLE 1.26 

Proving a Trigonometric Identity 
Prove the trigonometric identity 



60     1 • Functions and Graphs

Solution 
We start with the identity 

Dividing both sides of this equation by  we obtain 

Since  and  we conclude that 

 1.21 Prove the trigonometric identity 

Graphs and Periods of the Trigonometric Functions 
We have seen that as we travel around the unit circle, the values of the trigonometric functions repeat. We can see this 
pattern in the graphs of the functions. Let  be a point on the unit circle and let  be the corresponding angle 
Since the angle  and  correspond to the same point  the values of the trigonometric functions at  and at 

 are the same. Consequently, the trigonometric functions are periodic functions. The period of a function  is 
defined to be the smallest positive value  such that  for all values  in the domain of  The sine, cosine, 
secant, and cosecant functions have a period of  Since the tangent and cotangent functions repeat on an interval of 
length  their period is  (Figure 1.34). 

Figure 1.34 The six trigonometric functions are periodic. 
Just as with algebraic functions, we can apply transformations to trigonometric functions. In particular, consider the 
following function: 

Access for free at openstax.org



1.3 • Trigonometric Functions     61

(1.10) 

In Figure 1.35, the constant  causes a horizontal or phase shift. The factor  changes the period. This transformed sine 
function will have a period  The factor  results in a vertical stretch by a factor of  We say  is the 
“amplitude of ” The constant  causes a vertical shift. 

Figure 1.35 A graph of a general cosine function. 
Notice in Figure 1.34 that the graph of  is the graph of  shifted to the left  units. Therefore, we can 
write  Similarly, we can view the graph of  as the graph of  shifted right  units, 
and state that 
A shifted sine curve arises naturally when graphing the number of hours of daylight in a given location as a function of 
the day of the year. For example, suppose a city reports that June 21 is the longest day of the year with  hours and 
December 21 is the shortest day of the year with  hours. It can be shown that the function 

is a model for the number of hours of daylight  as a function of day of the year  (Figure 1.36). 

Figure 1.36 The hours of daylight as a function of day of the year can be modeled by a shifted sine curve. 

EXAMPLE 1.27 

Sketching the Graph of a Transformed Sine Curve 
Sketch a graph of 



62     1 • Functions and Graphs

Solution 
This graph is a horizontal compression by a factor of 2, a phase shift to the right by π/4 units, followed by a vertical 
stretch by a factor of 3, and then a vertical shift by 1 unit. The period of  is 

 1.22 Describe the relationship between the graph of  and the graph of 

 SECTION 1.3 EXERCISES 
For the following exercises, convert each angle in degrees to radians. Write the answer as a multiple of 
113.  114 .  115 . 
116.  117 . 

For the following exercises, convert each angle in radians to degrees. 

118.  119 .  120 . 

121.  122 . 

Evaluate the following functional values. 

123.  124 .  125 . 

126.  127 .  128 . 

For the following exercises, consider triangle ABC, a right triangle with a right angle at C. a. Find the missing side of the 
triangle. b. Find the six trigonometric function values for the angle at A. Where necessary, simplify to a fraction or round 
to three decimal places. 

 129 .  130 . 
131.  132 .  133 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



1.3 • Trigonometric Functions     63

134. 

For the following exercises,  is a point on the unit circle. a. Find the (exact) missing coordinate value of each point and 
b. find the values of the six trigonometric functions for the angle  with a terminal side that passes through point 
Rationalize denominators. 

135.  136 .  137 . 

138. 

For the following exercises, simplify each expression by writing it in terms of sines and cosines, then simplify. The final 
answer does not have to be in terms of sine and cosine only. 

139.  140 .  141 . 

142.  143 .  144 . 

145.  146 . 

For the following exercises, verify that each equation is an identity. 

147.  148 .  149 . 

150.  151 .  152 . 

153.  154 . 

For the following exercises, solve the trigonometric equations on the interval 

155.  156 .  157 . 

158.  159 .  160 . 

161.  162 . 

For the following exercises, each graph is of the form  or  where  Write the equation of 
the graph. 
163.  164 . 



64     1 • Functions and Graphs

165.  166 . 

For the following exercises, find a. the amplitude, b. the period, and c. the phase shift with direction for each function. 

167.  168 .  169 . 

170.  171 .  172 . 

173. [T] The diameter of a  174 . [T] Find the length of the  175 . [T] As a point P moves 
wheel rolling on the arc intercepted by central around a circle, the 
ground is 40 in. If the angle  in a circle of measure of the angle 
wheel rotates through an radius r. Round to the changes. The measure of 
angle of  how many nearest hundredth. how fast the angle is 
inches does it move? a.  cm, changing is called angular 
Approximate to the rad b.  cm, speed,  and is given by 
nearest whole inch.  rad c.  where  is in 

cm,  d. radians and t is time. Find 
cm, the angular speed for the 

given data. Round to the 
nearest thousandth. 
a.  sec 
b.  sec c. 

 min d. 
 min 

176. [T] A total of 250,000 m2  177 . [T] The area of an  178 . [T] A particle travels in a 
of land is needed to build isosceles triangle with circular path at a constant 
a nuclear power plant. equal sides of length x is angular speed  The 
Suppose it is decided that angular speed is modeled 
the area on which the where  is the angle by the function 
power plant is to be built formed by the two sides. 
should be circular. Find the area of an Determine the angular 
a. Find the radius of the isosceles triangle with speed at  sec. 

circular land area. equal sides of length 8 in. 
b. If the land area is to and angle  rad. 

form a  sector of a 
circle instead of a 
whole circle, find the 
length of the curved 
side. 

Access for free at openstax.org



1.4 • Inverse Functions     65

179. [T] An alternating current  180 . [T] The number of hours of  181 . [T] Suppose that 
for outlets in a home has daylight in a northeast city is 
voltage given by the modeled by the function is a mathematical model of 
function the temperature (in 

degrees Fahrenheit) at t 
where V is the voltage in 
volts at time t in seconds. where t is the number of days hours after midnight on a 

a. Find the period of the after January 1. certain day of the week. 

function and interpret a. Find the amplitude and a. Determine the 
amplitude and period. 

its meaning. period. 
b. Determine the number b. Determine the number of b. Find the temperature 7 

of periods that occur hours of daylight on the hours after midnight. 

when 1 sec has longest day of the year. c. At what time does 

passed. c. Determine the number of 
hours of daylight on the d. Sketch the graph of 
shortest day of the year. over 

d. Determine the number of 
hours of daylight 90 days 
after January 1. 

e. Sketch the graph of the 
function for one period 
starting on January 1. 

182. [T] The function 
 models 

the height H (in feet) of 
the tide t hours after 
midnight. Assume that 

 is midnight. 
a. Find the amplitude 

and period. 
b. Graph the function 

over one period. 
c. What is the height of 

the tide at 4:30 a.m.? 

1.4 Inverse Functions 
Learning Objectives 

1.4.1 Determine the conditions for when a function has an inverse. 
1.4.2 Use the horizontal line test to recognize when a function is one-to-one. 
1.4.3 Find the inverse of a given function. 
1.4.4 Draw the graph of an inverse function. 
1.4.5 Evaluate inverse trigonometric functions. 

An inverse function reverses the operation done by a particular function. In other words, whatever a function does, the 
inverse function undoes it. In this section, we define an inverse function formally and state the necessary conditions for 
an inverse function to exist. We examine how to find an inverse function and study the relationship between the graph of 
a function and the graph of its inverse. Then we apply these ideas to define and discuss properties of the inverse 
trigonometric functions. 

Existence of an Inverse Function 
We begin with an example. Given a function  and an output  we are often interested in finding what value or 
values  were mapped to  by  For example, consider the function  Since any output  we can 
solve this equation for  to find that the input is  This equation defines  as a function of  Denoting this 
function as  and writing  we see that for any  in the domain of 

 Thus, this new function,  “undid” what the original function  did. A function 
with this property is called the inverse function of the original function. 



66     1 • Functions and Graphs

Definition 

Given a function  with domain  and range  its inverse function (if it exists) is the function  with domain 
and range  such that  if  In other words, for a function  and its inverse 

(1.11) 

Note that  is read as “f inverse.” Here, the  is not used as an exponent and  Figure 1.37 shows 
the relationship between the domain and range of f and the domain and range of 

Figure 1.37 Given a function  and its inverse  if and only if  The range of  becomes the 
domain of  and the domain of  becomes the range of 
Recall that a function has exactly one output for each input. Therefore, to define an inverse function, we need to map 
each input to exactly one output. For example, let’s try to find the inverse function for  Solving the equation 

 for  we arrive at the equation  This equation does not describe  as a function of  because there are 
two solutions to this equation for every  The problem with trying to find an inverse function for  is that 
two inputs are sent to the same output for each output  The function  discussed earlier did not have 
this problem. For that function, each input was sent to a different output. A function that sends each input to a different 
output is called a one-to-one function. 

Definition 

We say a  is a one-to-one function if  when 

One way to determine whether a function is one-to-one is by looking at its graph. If a function is one-to-one, then no two 
inputs can be sent to the same output. Therefore, if we draw a horizontal line anywhere in the -plane, according to the 
horizontal line test, it cannot intersect the graph more than once. We note that the horizontal line test is different from 
the vertical line test. The vertical line test determines whether a graph is the graph of a function. The horizontal line test 
determines whether a function is one-to-one (Figure 1.38). 

Rule: Horizontal Line Test 

A function  is one-to-one if and only if every horizontal line intersects the graph of  no more than once. 

Access for free at openstax.org



1.4 • Inverse Functions     67

Figure 1.38 (a) The function  is not one-to-one because it fails the horizontal line test. (b) The function 
 is one-to-one because it passes the horizontal line test. 

EXAMPLE 1.28 

Determining Whether a Function Is One-to-One 
For each of the following functions, use the horizontal line test to determine whether it is one-to-one. 
a. 

b. 



68     1 • Functions and Graphs

Solution 
a. Since the horizontal line  for any integer  intersects the graph more than once, this function is not one-to-

one. 

b. Since every horizontal line intersects the graph once (at most), this function is one-to-one. 

 1.23 Is the function  graphed in the following image one-to-one? 

Access for free at openstax.org



1.4 • Inverse Functions     69

Finding a Function’s Inverse 
We can now consider one-to-one functions and show how to find their inverses. Recall that a function maps elements in 
the domain of  to elements in the range of  The inverse function maps each element from the range of  back to its 
corresponding element from the domain of  Therefore, to find the inverse function of a one-to-one function  given 
any  in the range of  we need to determine which  in the domain of  satisfies  Since  is one-to-one, there 
is exactly one such value  We can find that value  by solving the equation  for  Doing so, we are able to 
write  as a function of  where the domain of this function is the range of  and the range of this new function is the 
domain of  Consequently, this function is the inverse of  and we write  Since we typically use the variable 

 to denote the independent variable and  to denote the dependent variable, we often interchange the roles of  and 
and write  Representing the inverse function in this way is also helpful later when we graph a function  and 
its inverse  on the same axes. 

Problem-Solving Strategy 

Finding an Inverse Function 
1. Solve the equation  for 
2. Interchange the variables  and  and write 

EXAMPLE 1.29 

Finding an Inverse Function 
Find the inverse for the function  State the domain and range of the inverse function. Verify that 

Solution 
Follow the steps outlined in the strategy. 

Step 1. If  then  and 

Step 2. Rewrite as  and let 

Therefore, 

Since the domain of  is ∞ ∞  the range of  is ∞ ∞  Since the range of  is ∞ ∞  the domain of  is 
∞ ∞

You can verify that  by writing 

Note that for  to be the inverse of  both  and  for all x in the domain of the 
inside function. 

 1.24 Find the inverse of the function  State the domain and range of the inverse function. 

Graphing Inverse Functions 
Let’s consider the relationship between the graph of a function  and the graph of its inverse. Consider the graph of 
shown in Figure 1.39 and a point  on the graph. Since  then  Therefore, when we graph 
the point  is on the graph. As a result, the graph of  is a reflection of the graph of  about the line 



70     1 • Functions and Graphs

Figure 1.39 (a) The graph of this function  shows point  on the graph of  (b) Since  is on the graph of  the 
point  is on the graph of  The graph of  is a reflection of the graph of  about the line 

EXAMPLE 1.30 

Sketching Graphs of Inverse Functions 
For the graph of  in the following image, sketch a graph of  by sketching the line  and using symmetry. 
Identify the domain and range of 

Solution 
Reflect the graph about the line  The domain of  is ∞  The range of  is ∞  By using the 
preceding strategy for finding inverse functions, we can verify that the inverse function is  as shown in 
the graph. 

Access for free at openstax.org



1.4 • Inverse Functions     71

 1.25 Sketch the graph of  and the graph of its inverse using the symmetry property of inverse 
functions. 

Restricting Domains 
As we have seen,  does not have an inverse function because it is not one-to-one. However, we can choose a 
subset of the domain of  such that the function is one-to-one. This subset is called a restricted domain. By restricting 
the domain of  we can define a new function  such that the domain of  is the restricted domain of  and 
for all  in the domain of  Then we can define an inverse function for  on that domain. For example, since  is 
one-to-one on the interval ∞  we can define a new function  such that the domain of  is ∞  and  for all 

 in its domain. Since  is a one-to-one function, it has an inverse function, given by the formula  On the 
other hand, the function  is also one-to-one on the domain ∞  Therefore, we could also define a new 
function  such that the domain of  is ∞  and  for all  in the domain of  Then  is a one-to-one 
function and must also have an inverse. Its inverse is given by the formula  (Figure 1.40). 

Figure 1.40 (a) For  restricted to ∞  (b) For  restricted to 

∞

EXAMPLE 1.31 

Restricting the Domain 
Consider the function 
a. Sketch the graph of  and use the horizontal line test to show that  is not one-to-one. 
b. Show that  is one-to-one on the restricted domain ∞  Determine the domain and range for the inverse of 

on this restricted domain and find a formula for 

Solution 
a. The graph of  is the graph of  shifted left 1 unit. Since there exists a horizontal line intersecting the graph 

more than once,  is not one-to-one. 



72     1 • Functions and Graphs

b. On the interval ∞  is one-to-one. 

The domain and range of  are given by the range and domain of  respectively. Therefore, the domain of  is 
∞  and the range of  is ∞  To find a formula for  solve the equation  for  If 

 then  Since we are restricting the domain to the interval where  we need 
 Therefore,  Interchanging  and  we write  and conclude that 

 1.26 Consider  restricted to the domain ∞  Verify that  is one-to-one on this domain. 
Determine the domain and range of the inverse of  and find a formula for 

Inverse Trigonometric Functions 
The six basic trigonometric functions are periodic, and therefore they are not one-to-one. However, if we restrict the 
domain of a trigonometric function to an interval where it is one-to-one, we can define its inverse. Consider the sine 
function (Figure 1.34). The sine function is one-to-one on an infinite number of intervals, but the standard convention is 
to restrict the domain to the interval  By doing so, we define the inverse sine function on the domain 
such that for any  in the interval  the inverse sine function tells us which angle  in the interval  satisfies 

 Similarly, we can restrict the domains of the other trigonometric functions to define inverse trigonometric 
functions, which are functions that tell us which angle in a certain interval has a specified trigonometric value. 

Access for free at openstax.org



1.4 • Inverse Functions     73

Definition 

The inverse sine function, denoted  or arcsin, and the inverse cosine function, denoted  or arccos, are 
defined on the domain  as follows: 

(1.12) 

The inverse tangent function, denoted  or arctan, and inverse cotangent function, denoted  or arccot, are 
defined on the domain ∞ ∞  as follows: 

(1.13) 

The inverse cosecant function, denoted  or arccsc, and inverse secant function, denoted  or arcsec, are 
defined on the domain  as follows: 

(1.14) 

To graph the inverse trigonometric functions, we use the graphs of the trigonometric functions restricted to the domains 
defined earlier and reflect the graphs about the line  (Figure 1.41). 

Figure 1.41 The graph of each of the inverse trigonometric functions is a reflection about the line  of the 
corresponding restricted trigonometric function. 



74     1 • Functions and Graphs

 MEDIA 

Go to the following site (http://www.openstax.org/l/20_inversefun) for more comparisons of functions and their 
inverses. 

When evaluating an inverse trigonometric function, the output is an angle. For example, to evaluate  we need 
to find an angle  such that  Clearly, many angles have this property. However, given the definition of 
we need the angle  that not only solves this equation, but also lies in the interval  We conclude that 

We now consider a composition of a trigonometric function and its inverse. For example, consider the two expressions 
 and  For the first one, we simplify as follows: 

For the second one, we have 

The inverse function is supposed to “undo” the original function, so why isn’t  Recalling our definition 
of inverse functions, a function  and its inverse  satisfy the conditions  for all  in the domain of 

 and  for all  in the domain of  so what happened here? The issue is that the inverse sine function, 
 is the inverse of the restricted sine function defined on the domain  Therefore, for  in the interval 

 it is true that  However, for values of  outside this interval, the equation does not hold, even 
though  is defined for all real numbers 

What about  Does that have a similar issue? The answer is no. Since the domain of  is the interval 
 we conclude that  if  and the expression is not defined for other values of  To 

summarize, 

and 

Similarly, for the cosine function, 

and 

Similar properties hold for the other trigonometric functions and their inverses. 

EXAMPLE 1.32 

Evaluating Expressions Involving Inverse Trigonometric Functions 
Evaluate each of the following expressions. 

a. 

b. 

c. 
d. 

Access for free at openstax.org



1.4 • Inverse Functions     75

Solution 
a. Evaluating  is equivalent to finding the angle  such that  and  The 

angle  satisfies these two conditions. Therefore, 

b. First we use the fact that  Then  Therefore, 

c. To evaluate  first use the fact that  Then we need to find the angle  such 
that  and  Since  satisfies both these conditions, we have 

d. Since  we need to evaluate  That is, we need to find the angle  such that 
 and  Since  satisfies both these conditions, we can conclude that 

STUDENT PROJECT 

The Maximum Value of a Function 
In many areas of science, engineering, and mathematics, it is useful to know the maximum value a function can 
obtain, even if we don’t know its exact value at a given instant. For instance, if we have a function describing the 
strength of a roof beam, we would want to know the maximum weight the beam can support without breaking. If we 
have a function that describes the speed of a train, we would want to know its maximum speed before it jumps off 
the rails. Safe design often depends on knowing maximum values. 

This project describes a simple example of a function with a maximum value that depends on two equation 
coefficients. We will see that maximum values can depend on several factors other than the independent variable x. 

1. Consider the graph in Figure 1.42 of the function  Describe its overall shape. Is it periodic? How 
do you know? 

Figure 1.42 The graph of 

Using a graphing calculator or other graphing device, estimate the - and -values of the maximum point for the 
graph (the first such point where x > 0). It may be helpful to express the -value as a multiple of π. 

2. Now consider other graphs of the form  for various values of A and B. Sketch the graph 
when A = 2 and B = 1, and find the - and y-values for the maximum point. (Remember to express the x-value as 
a multiple of π, if possible.) Has it moved? 

3. Repeat for A = 1, B = 2. Is there any relationship to what you found in part (2)? 
4. Complete the following table, adding a few choices of your own for A and B: 



76     1 • Functions and Graphs

A B x y A B x y 

0 1 1 

1 0 1 

1 1 12 5 

1 2 5 12 

2 1 

2 2 

3 4 

4 3 

5. Try to figure out the formula for the y-values. 
6. The formula for the -values is a little harder. The most helpful points from the table are 

 (Hint: Consider inverse trigonometric functions.) 
7. If you found formulas for parts (5) and (6), show that they work together. That is, substitute the -value formula 

you found into  and simplify it to arrive at the -value formula you found. 

 SECTION 1.4 EXERCISES 
For the following exercises, use the horizontal line test to determine whether each of the given graphs is one-to-one. 
183.  184 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



1.4 • Inverse Functions     77

185.  186 . 

187.  188 . 

For the following exercises, a. find the inverse function, and b. find the domain and range of the inverse function. 

189.  190 .  191 . 

192.  193 .  194 . 

For the following exercises, use the graph of  to sketch the graph of its inverse function. 
195.  196 . 



78     1 • Functions and Graphs

197.  198 . 

For the following exercises, use composition to determine which pairs of functions are inverses. 

199.  200 .  201 . 

202.  203 . 

204.  205 . 

206. 

For the following exercises, evaluate the functions. Give the exact value. 

207.  208 .  209 . 

210.  211 .  212 . 

213.  214 .  215 . 

216. The function  217 . [T] The velocity V (in  218 . A function that converts 
centimeters per second) of dress sizes in the United 

converts degrees blood in an artery at a States to those in Europe 
Fahrenheit to degrees distance x cm from the is given by 
Celsius. center of the artery can be 
a. Find the inverse modeled by the function a. Find the European 

function dress sizes that 
b. What is the inverse for correspond to sizes 6, 

function used for? a. Find 8, 10, and 12 in the 
b. Interpret what the United States. 

inverse function is used b. Find the function that 
for. converts European 

c. Find the distance from dress sizes to U.S. 
the center of an artery dress sizes. 
with a velocity of 15 cm/ c. Use part b. to find the 
sec, 10 cm/sec, and 5 dress sizes in the 
cm/sec. United States that 

correspond to 46, 52, 
62, and 70. 

Access for free at openstax.org



1.4 • Inverse Functions     79

219. [T] The cost to remove a  220 . [T] A race car is  221 . [T] An airplane’s Mach number M is 
toxin from a lake is accelerating at a velocity the ratio of its speed to the speed of 
modeled by the function given by sound. When a plane is flying at a 

 where v constant altitude, then its Mach angle 
where  is the cost (in is the velocity (in feet per is given by 
thousands of dollars) and second) at time t. Find the Mach angle (to the nearest 

 is the amount of toxin in a. Find the velocity of the degree) for the following Mach 
a small lake (measured in car at 10 sec. numbers. 
parts per billion [ppb]). b. Find the inverse 
This model is valid only function. 
when the amount of toxin c. Use part b. to 
is less than 85 ppb. determine how long it 
a. Find the cost to takes for the car to 

remove 25 ppb, 40 reach a speed of 150 
ppb, and 50 ppb of the ft/sec. 
toxin from the lake. 

b. Find the inverse 
function. c. Use part b. 
to determine how a. 
much of the toxin is b. 
removed for $50,000. c. 

222. [T] Using  223 . [T] The average temperature (in  224 . [T] The depth (in feet) of 
 find the degrees Celsius) of a city in the water at a dock changes 

Mach number M for the northern United States can be with the rise and fall of 
following angles. modeled by the function tides. It is modeled by the 
a. function 
b. where  is time in months and 
c.  corresponds to where  is the number of 

January 1. Determine the day(s) hours after midnight. 
(month and day) when the Determine the first time 
average temperature is after midnight when the 
Use the integer portion of your depth is 11.75 ft. 
answer(s) as the month and 
calculate the day of the month 
from the decimal portion. 

225. [T] An object moving in  226 . [T] A local art gallery has a  227 . [T] Use a calculator to 
simple harmonic motion portrait 3 ft in height that evaluate 
is modeled by the is hung 2.5 ft above the and 
function eye level of an average Explain the results of 

person. The viewing angle each. 
where  is measured in  can be modeled by the 
inches and  is measured function 
in seconds. Determine the 
first time when the where  is the distance (in 
distance moved is 4.5 in. feet) from the portrait. 

Find the viewing angle 
when a person is 4 ft from 
the portrait. 

228. [T] Use a calculator to 
evaluate 
and 
Explain the results of 
each. 



80     1 • Functions and Graphs

1.5 Exponential and Logarithmic Functions 
Learning Objectives 

1.5.1 Identify the form of an exponential function. 
1.5.2 Explain the difference between the graphs of  and 
1.5.3 Recognize the significance of the number 
1.5.4 Identify the form of a logarithmic function. 
1.5.5 Explain the relationship between exponential and logarithmic functions. 
1.5.6 Describe how to calculate a logarithm to a different base. 
1.5.7 Identify the hyperbolic functions, their graphs, and basic identities. 

In this section we examine exponential and logarithmic functions. We use the properties of these functions to solve 
equations involving exponential or logarithmic terms, and we study the meaning and importance of the number  We 
also define hyperbolic and inverse hyperbolic functions, which involve combinations of exponential and logarithmic 
functions. (Note that we present alternative definitions of exponential and logarithmic functions in the chapter 
Applications of Integrations, and prove that the functions have the same properties with either definition.) 

Exponential Functions 
Exponential functions arise in many applications. One common example is population growth. 
For example, if a population starts with  individuals and then grows at an annual rate of  its population after 1 year 
is 

Its population after 2 years is 

In general, its population after  years is 

which is an exponential function. More generally, any function of the form  where  is an 
exponential function with base  and exponent x. Exponential functions have constant bases and variable exponents. 
Note that a function of the form  for some constant  is not an exponential function but a power function. 

To see the difference between an exponential function and a power function, we compare the functions  and 
 In Table 1.10, we see that both  and  approach infinity as ∞  Eventually, however,  becomes larger 

than  and grows more rapidly as ∞  In the opposite direction, as ∞ ∞  whereas  The line 
 is a horizontal asymptote for 

Table 1.10 Values of  and 

In Figure 1.43, we graph both  and  to show how the graphs differ. 

Access for free at openstax.org



1.5 • Exponential and Logarithmic Functions     81

Figure 1.43 Both  and  approach infinity as ∞  but  grows more rapidly than  As ∞ ∞
whereas 

Evaluating Exponential Functions 
Recall the properties of exponents: If  is a positive integer, then we define  (with  factors of  If  is a 
negative integer, then  for some positive integer  and we define  Also,  is defined to be  If 

 is a rational number, then  where  and  are integers and  For example, 
However, how is  defined if  is an irrational number? For example, what do we mean by  This is too complex a 
question for us to answer fully right now; however, we can make an approximation. In Table 1.11, we list some rational 
numbers approaching  and the values of  for each rational number  are presented as well. We claim that if we 
choose rational numbers  getting closer and closer to  the values of  get closer and closer to some number 
We define that number  to be 

Table 1.11 Values of  for a List of Rational Numbers Approximating 

EXAMPLE 1.33 

Bacterial Growth 
Suppose a particular population of bacteria is known to double in size every  hours. If a culture starts with 
bacteria, the number of bacteria after  hours is  The number of bacteria after  hours is 

 In general, the number of bacteria after  hours is  Letting  we 
see that the number of bacteria after  hours is  Find the number of bacteria after  hours,  hours, 
and  hours. 

Solution 
The number of bacteria after 6 hours is given by  bacteria. The number of bacteria after 
hours is given by  bacteria. The number of bacteria after  hours is given by 

 bacteria. 

 1.27 Given the exponential function  evaluate  and 



82     1 • Functions and Graphs

 MEDIA 

Go to Population Balance (http://www.openstax.org/l/20_exponengrow) for another example of exponential 
population growth. 

Graphing Exponential Functions 
For any base  the exponential function  is defined for all real numbers  and  Therefore, 
the domain of  is ∞ ∞  and the range is ∞  To graph  we note that for  is increasing on 

∞ ∞  and ∞  as ∞  whereas  as ∞  On the other hand, if  is decreasing 
on ∞ ∞  and  as ∞  whereas ∞  as ∞  (Figure 1.44). 

Figure 1.44 If  then  is increasing on ∞ ∞  If  then  is decreasing on ∞ ∞
 MEDIA 

Visit this site (http://www.openstax.org/l/20_inverse) for more exploration of the graphs of exponential functions. 

Note that exponential functions satisfy the general laws of exponents. To remind you of these laws, we state them as 
rules. 

Rule: Laws of Exponents 

For any constants  and for all x and y, 

1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 

EXAMPLE 1.34 

Using the Laws of Exponents 
Use the laws of exponents to simplify each of the following expressions. 

a. 

b. 

Solution 
a. We can simplify as follows: 

Access for free at openstax.org



1.5 • Exponential and Logarithmic Functions     83

b. We can simplify as follows: 

 1.28 Use the laws of exponents to simplify 

The Number e 
A special type of exponential function appears frequently in real-world applications. To describe it, consider the following 
example of exponential growth, which arises from compounding interest in a savings account. Suppose a person invests 

 dollars in a savings account with an annual interest rate  compounded annually. The amount of money after 1 year is 

The amount of money after  years is 

More generally, the amount after  years is 

If the money is compounded 2 times per year, the amount of money after half a year is 

The amount of money after  year is 

After  years, the amount of money in the account is 

More generally, if the money is compounded  times per year, the amount of money in the account after  years is given 
by the function 

What happens as ∞  To answer this question, we let  and write 

and examine the behavior of  as ∞  using a table of values (Table 1.12). 

Table 1.12 Values of  as ∞

Looking at this table, it appears that  is approaching a number between  and  as ∞  In fact, 



84     1 • Functions and Graphs

 does approach some number as ∞  We call this number . To six decimal places of accuracy, 

The letter  was first used to represent this number by the Swiss mathematician Leonhard Euler during the 1720s. 
Although Euler did not discover the number, he showed many important connections between  and logarithmic 
functions. We still use the notation  today to honor Euler’s work because it appears in many areas of mathematics and 
because we can use it in many practical applications. 
Returning to our savings account example, we can conclude that if a person puts  dollars in an account at an annual 
interest rate  compounded continuously, then  This function may be familiar. Since functions involving 
base  arise often in applications, we call the function  the natural exponential function. Not only is this 
function interesting because of the definition of the number  but also, as discussed next, its graph has an important 
property. 

Since  we know  is increasing on ∞ ∞  In Figure 1.45, we show a graph of  along with a tangent 
line to the graph of at  We give a precise definition of tangent line in the next chapter; but, informally, we say a 
tangent line to a graph of  at  is a line that passes through the point  and has the same “slope” as  at 
that point  The function  is the only exponential function  with tangent line at  that has a slope of 1. As 
we see later in the text, having this property makes the natural exponential function the most simple exponential 
function to use in many instances. 

Figure 1.45 The graph of  has a tangent line with slope  at 

EXAMPLE 1.35 

Compounding Interest 
Suppose  is invested in an account at an annual interest rate of  compounded continuously. 
a. Let  denote the number of years after the initial investment and  denote the amount of money in the account 

at time  Find a formula for 
b. Find the amount of money in the account after  years and after  years. 

Solution 
a. If  dollars are invested in an account at an annual interest rate  compounded continuously, then 

Here  and  Therefore, 
b. After  years, the amount of money in the account is 

After  years, the amount of money in the account is 

 1.29 If  is invested in an account at an annual interest rate of  compounded continuously, find a 
formula for the amount of money in the account after  years. Find the amount of money after  years. 

Logarithmic Functions 
Using our understanding of exponential functions, we can discuss their inverses, which are the logarithmic functions. 
These come in handy when we need to consider any phenomenon that varies over a wide range of values, such as pH in 
chemistry or decibels in sound levels. 

Access for free at openstax.org



1.5 • Exponential and Logarithmic Functions     85

The exponential function  is one-to-one, with domain ∞ ∞  and range ∞  Therefore, it has an inverse 
function, called the logarithmic function with base  For any  the logarithmic function with base b, denoted 

 has domain ∞  and range ∞ ∞  and satisfies 

For example, 

Furthermore, since  and  are inverse functions, 

The most commonly used logarithmic function is the function  Since this function uses natural  as its base, it is 
called the natural logarithm. Here we use the notation  or  to mean  For example, 

Since the functions  and  are inverses of each other, 

and their graphs are symmetric about the line  (Figure 1.46). 

Figure 1.46 The functions  and  are inverses of each other, so their graphs are symmetric about the line 

 MEDIA 

At this site (http://www.openstax.org/l/20_logscale) you can see an example of a base-10 logarithmic scale. 

In general, for any base  the function  is symmetric about the line  with the function 
 Using this fact and the graphs of the exponential functions, we graph functions  for several values of 

 (Figure 1.47). 



86     1 • Functions and Graphs

Figure 1.47 Graphs of  are depicted for 

Before solving some equations involving exponential and logarithmic functions, let’s review the basic properties of 
logarithms. 

Rule: Properties of Logarithms 

If  and  is any real number, then 

EXAMPLE 1.36 

Solving Equations Involving Exponential Functions 
Solve each of the following equations for 
a. 
b. 

Solution 
a. Applying the natural logarithm function to both sides of the equation, we have 

Using the power property of logarithms, 

Therefore, 
b. Multiplying both sides of the equation by  we arrive at the equation 

Rewriting this equation as 

we can then rewrite it as a quadratic equation in 

Now we can solve the quadratic equation. Factoring this equation, we obtain 

Access for free at openstax.org



1.5 • Exponential and Logarithmic Functions     87

Therefore, the solutions satisfy  and  Taking the natural logarithm of both sides gives us the solutions 

 1.30 Solve 

EXAMPLE 1.37 

Solving Equations Involving Logarithmic Functions 
Solve each of the following equations for 

a. 
b. 
c. 

Solution 
a. By the definition of the natural logarithm function, 

Therefore, the solution is 
b. Using the product and power properties of logarithmic functions, rewrite the left-hand side of the equation as 

Therefore, the equation can be rewritten as 

The solution is 
c. Using the power property of logarithmic functions, we can rewrite the equation as 

Using the quotient property, this becomes 

Therefore,  which implies  We should then check for any extraneous solutions. 

 1.31 Solve 

When evaluating a logarithmic function with a calculator, you may have noticed that the only options are  or log, 
called the common logarithm, or ln, which is the natural logarithm. However, exponential functions and logarithm 
functions can be expressed in terms of any desired base  If you need to use a calculator to evaluate an expression with 
a different base, you can apply the change-of-base formulas first. Using this change of base, we typically write a given 
exponential or logarithmic function in terms of the natural exponential and natural logarithmic functions. 

Rule: Change-of-Base Formulas 

Let  and 

1.  for any real number 
If  this equation reduces to 



88     1 • Functions and Graphs

2.  for any real number 
If  this equation reduces to 

Proof 
For the first change-of-base formula, we begin by making use of the power property of logarithmic functions. We know 
that for any base  Therefore, 

In addition, we know that  and  are inverse functions. Therefore, 

Combining these last two equalities, we conclude that 
To prove the second property, we show that 

Let  and  We will show that  By the definition of logarithmic functions, we 
know that  and  From the previous equations, we see that 

Therefore,  Since exponential functions are one-to-one, we can conclude that 
□ 

EXAMPLE 1.38 

Changing Bases 
Use a calculating utility to evaluate  with the change-of-base formula presented earlier. 

Solution 
Use the second equation with  and 

 1.32 Use the change-of-base formula and a calculating utility to evaluate 

EXAMPLE 1.39 

Chapter Opener: The Richter Scale for Earthquakes 

Figure 1.48 (credit: modification of work by Robb Hannawacker, NPS) 
In 1935, Charles Richter developed a scale (now known as the Richter scale) to measure the magnitude of an earthquake. 
The scale is a base-10 logarithmic scale, and it can be described as follows: Consider one earthquake with magnitude 
on the Richter scale and a second earthquake with magnitude  on the Richter scale. Suppose  which means 
the earthquake of magnitude  is stronger, but how much stronger is it than the other earthquake? A way of 
measuring the intensity of an earthquake is by using a seismograph to measure the amplitude of the earthquake waves. 
If  is the amplitude measured for the first earthquake and  is the amplitude measured for the second earthquake, 
then the amplitudes and magnitudes of the two earthquakes satisfy the following equation: 

Access for free at openstax.org



1.5 • Exponential and Logarithmic Functions     89

Consider an earthquake that measures 8 on the Richter scale and an earthquake that measures 7 on the Richter scale. 
Then, 

Therefore, 

which implies  or  Since  is 10 times the size of  we say that the first earthquake is 10 
times as intense as the second earthquake. On the other hand, if one earthquake measures 8 on the Richter scale and 
another measures 6, then the relative intensity of the two earthquakes satisfies the equation 

Therefore,  That is, the first earthquake is 100 times more intense than the second earthquake. 
How can we use logarithmic functions to compare the relative severity of the magnitude 9 earthquake in Japan in 2011 
with the magnitude 7.3 earthquake in Haiti in 2010? 

Solution 
To compare the Japan and Haiti earthquakes, we can use an equation presented earlier: 

Therefore,  and we conclude that the earthquake in Japan was approximately  times more intense than 
the earthquake in Haiti. 

 1.33 Compare the relative severity of a magnitude  earthquake with a magnitude  earthquake. 

Hyperbolic Functions 
The hyperbolic functions are defined in terms of certain combinations of  and  These functions arise naturally in 
various engineering and physics applications, including the study of water waves and vibrations of elastic membranes. 
Another common use for a hyperbolic function is the representation of a hanging chain or cable, also known as a 
catenary (Figure 1.49). If we introduce a coordinate system so that the low point of the chain lies along the -axis, we can 
describe the height of the chain in terms of a hyperbolic function. First, we define the hyperbolic functions. 



90     1 • Functions and Graphs

Figure 1.49 The shape of a strand of silk in a spider’s web can be described in terms of a hyperbolic function. The same 
shape applies to a chain or cable hanging from two supports with only its own weight. (credit: “Mtpaley”, Wikimedia 
Commons) 

Definition 

Hyperbolic cosine 

Hyperbolic sine 

Hyperbolic tangent 

Hyperbolic cosecant 

Hyperbolic secant 

Hyperbolic cotangent 

The name cosh rhymes with “gosh,” whereas the name sinh is pronounced “cinch.” Tanh, sech, csch, and coth are 
pronounced “tanch,” “seech,” “coseech,” and “cotanch,” respectively. 
Using the definition of  and principles of physics, it can be shown that the height of a hanging chain, such as the 
one in Figure 1.49, can be described by the function  for certain constants  and 

But why are these functions called hyperbolic functions? To answer this question, consider the quantity 
Using the definition of  and  we see that 

Access for free at openstax.org



1.5 • Exponential and Logarithmic Functions     91

This identity is the analog of the trigonometric identity  Here, given a value  the point 
 lies on the unit hyperbola  (Figure 1.50). 

Figure 1.50 The unit hyperbola 

Graphs of Hyperbolic Functions 
To graph  and  we make use of the fact that both functions approach  as ∞  since  as 

∞  As ∞  approaches  whereas  approaches  Therefore, using the graphs of 
 and  as guides, we graph  and  To graph  we use the fact that 

 for all  as ∞  and  as ∞  The graphs of the other 
three hyperbolic functions can be sketched using the graphs of  and  (Figure 1.51). 



92     1 • Functions and Graphs

Figure 1.51 The hyperbolic functions involve combinations of  and 

Identities Involving Hyperbolic Functions 
The identity  shown in Figure 1.50, is one of several identities involving the hyperbolic functions, some of 
which are listed next. The first four properties follow easily from the definitions of hyperbolic sine and hyperbolic cosine. 
Except for some differences in signs, most of these properties are analogous to identities for trigonometric functions. 

Rule: Identities Involving Hyperbolic Functions 

1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 

Access for free at openstax.org



1.5 • Exponential and Logarithmic Functions     93

EXAMPLE 1.40 

Evaluating Hyperbolic Functions 
a. Simplify 
b. If  find the values of the remaining five hyperbolic functions. 

Solution 
a. Using the definition of the  function, we write 

b. Using the identity  we see that 

Since  for all  we must have  Then, using the definitions for the other hyperbolic functions, 
we conclude that  and 

 1.34 Simplify 

Inverse Hyperbolic Functions 
From the graphs of the hyperbolic functions, we see that all of them are one-to-one except  and  If we 
restrict the domains of these two functions to the interval ∞  then all the hyperbolic functions are one-to-one, and 
we can define the inverse hyperbolic functions. Since the hyperbolic functions themselves involve exponential 
functions, the inverse hyperbolic functions involve logarithmic functions. 

Definition 

Inverse Hyperbolic Functions 

Let’s look at how to derive the first equation. The others follow similarly. Suppose  Then,  and, by 
the definition of the hyperbolic sine function,  Therefore, 

Multiplying this equation by  we obtain 

This can be solved like a quadratic equation, with the solution 

Since  the only solution is the one with the positive sign. Applying the natural logarithm to both sides of the 
equation, we conclude that 



94     1 • Functions and Graphs

EXAMPLE 1.41 

Evaluating Inverse Hyperbolic Functions 
Evaluate each of the following expressions. 

Solution 

 1.35 Evaluate 

 SECTION 1.5 EXERCISES 
For the following exercises, evaluate the given exponential functions as indicated, accurate to two significant digits after 
the decimal. 
229.  a.  b.  230 .  a.  231 .  a.  b. 

 c. b.  c.  c. 

232.  a.  b. 
 c. 

For the following exercises, match the exponential equation to the correct graph. 
a. 
b. 
c. 
d. 
e. 
f. 

233.  234 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



1.5 • Exponential and Logarithmic Functions     95

235.  236 . 

237.  238 . 

For the following exercises, sketch the graph of the exponential function. Determine the domain, range, and horizontal 
asymptote. 

239. 240 . 241 . 

242. 243 . 244 . 
245. 

For the following exercises, write the equation in equivalent exponential form. 

246.  247 .  248 . 

249.  250 .  251 . 

252.  253 . 

For the following exercises, write the equation in equivalent logarithmic form. 

254.  255 .  256 . 

257.  258 .  259 . 

260.  261 .  262 . 

263. 

For the following exercises, sketch the graph of the logarithmic function. Determine the domain, range, and vertical 
asymptote. 
264. 265 . 266 . 



96     1 • Functions and Graphs

267. 268 . 269 . 

For the following exercises, use properties of logarithms to write the expressions as a sum, difference, and/or product of 
logarithms. 

270.  271 .  272 . 

273.  274 .  275 . 

For the following exercises, solve the exponential equation exactly. 

276.  277 .  278 . 

279.  280 .  281 . 

282.  283 . 

For the following exercises, solve the logarithmic equation exactly, if possible. 
284.  285 .  286 . 

287.  288 .  289 . 

290.  291 . 

For the following exercises, use the change-of-base formula and either base 10 or base e to evaluate the given 
expressions. Answer in exact form and in approximate form, rounding to four decimal places. 
292.  293 .  294 . 

295.  296 .  297 . 

298. Rewrite the following expressions in  299 . [T] The number of  300 . [T] The demand D (in 
terms of exponentials and simplify. bacteria N in a culture millions of barrels) for oil 
a.  b.  c. after t days can be in an oil-rich country is 

 d. modeled by the function given by the function 
 Find 

the number of bacteria where p is the price (in 
present after 15 days. dollars) of a barrel of oil. 

Find the amount of oil 
demanded (to the nearest 
million barrels) when the 
price is between $15 and 
$20. 

Access for free at openstax.org



1.5 • Exponential and Logarithmic Functions     97

301. [T] The amount A of a  302 . [T] An investment is  303 . [T] The concentration of 
$100,000 investment compounded monthly, hydrogen ions in a 
paying continuously and quarterly, or yearly and is substance is denoted by 
compounded for t years is given by the function  measured in moles 
given by  where per liter. The pH of a 

substance is defined by the 
Find the amount A  is the value of the logarithmic function 
accumulated in 5 years. investment at time  is  This 

the initial principle that 
was invested,  is the function is used to measure 
annual interest rate, and the acidity of a substance. 

 is the number of time The pH of water is 7. A 
the interest is substance with a pH less 
compounded per year. than 7 is an acid, whereas 
Given a yearly interest one that has a pH of more 
rate of 3.5% and an initial than 7 is a base. 
principle of $100,000, find a. Find the pH of the 
the amount following substances. 
accumulated in 5 years Round answers to one 
for interest that is digit. 
compounded a. daily, b., b. Determine whether the 
monthly, c. quarterly, and substance is an acid or a 
d. yearly. base. 

i. Eggs: 

mol/L 
ii. Beer: 

mol/L 
iii. Tomato Juice: 

mol/L 

304. [T] Iodine-131 is a  305 . [T] According to the World  306 . [T] The amount A 
radioactive substance Bank, at the end of 2013 accumulated after 1000 
that decays according to (  ) the U.S. dollars is invested for t 
the function population was 316 years at an interest rate 

million and was of 4% is modeled by the 
where  is the initial increasing according to function 
quantity of a sample of the following model: 
the substance and t is in  where a. Find the amount 
days. Determine how long P is measured in millions accumulated after 5 
it takes (to the nearest of people and t is years and 10 years. 
day) for 95% of a quantity measured in years after b. Determine how long it 
to decay. 2013. takes for the original 

a. Based on this model, investment to triple. 
what will be the 
population of the 
United States in 2020? 

b. Determine when the 
U.S. population will be 
twice what it is in 
2013. 



98     1 • Functions and Graphs

307. [T] A bacterial colony  308 . [T] The rabbit population  309 . [T] The 1906 earthquake 
grown in a lab is known to on a game reserve in San Francisco had a 
double in number in 12 doubles every 6 months. magnitude of 8.3 on the 
hours. Suppose, initially, Suppose there were 120 Richter scale. At the same 
there are 1000 bacteria rabbits initially. time, in Japan, an 
present. a. Use the exponential earthquake with 
a. Use the exponential function  to magnitude 4.9 caused 

function  to determine the growth only minor damage. 
determine the value rate constant  Round Approximately how much 
which is the growth to four decimal places. more intense was the San 
rate of the bacteria. b. Use the function in Francisco earthquake 
Round to four decimal part a. to determine than the Japanese 
places. approximately how earthquake? See the 

b. Determine long it takes for the definition of Richter Scale 
approximately how rabbit population to in [link] in this section. 
long it takes for reach 3500. 
200,000 bacteria to 
grow. 

Access for free at openstax.org



1 • Chapter Review     99

Chapter Review 
Key Terms 
absolute value function  

algebraic function  a function involving any combination of only the basic operations of addition, subtraction, 
multiplication, division, powers, and roots applied to an input variable 

base  the number  in the exponential function  and the logarithmic function 
composite function  given two functions  and  a new function, denoted  such that 
cubic function  a polynomial of degree 3; that is, a function of the form  where 
decreasing on the interval  a function decreasing on the interval  if, for all  if 
degree  for a polynomial function, the value of the largest exponent of any term 
dependent variable  the output variable for a function 
domain  the set of inputs for a function 
even function  a function is even if  for all  in the domain of 
exponent  the value  in the expression 
function  a set of inputs, a set of outputs, and a rule for mapping each input to exactly one output 
graph of a function  the set of points  such that  is in the domain of  and 
horizontal line test  a function  is one-to-one if and only if every horizontal line intersects the graph of  at most, 

once 
hyperbolic functions  the functions denoted  and  which involve certain combinations 

of  and 
increasing on the interval  a function increasing on the interval  if for all  if 
independent variable  the input variable for a function 
inverse function  for a function  the inverse function  satisfies  if 
inverse hyperbolic functions  the inverses of the hyperbolic functions where  and  are restricted to the 

domain ∞  each of these functions can be expressed in terms of a composition of the natural logarithm function 
and an algebraic function 

inverse trigonometric functions  the inverses of the trigonometric functions are defined on restricted domains where 
they are one-to-one functions 

linear function  a function that can be written in the form 
logarithmic function  a function of the form  for some base  such that  if and 

only if 
mathematical model  A method of simulating real-life situations with mathematical equations 
natural exponential function  the function 
natural logarithm  the function 
number e  as  gets larger, the quantity  gets closer to some real number; we define that real number to 

be  the value of  is approximately 
odd function  a function is odd if  for all  in the domain of 
one-to-one function  a function  is one-to-one if  if 
periodic function  a function is periodic if it has a repeating pattern as the values of  move from left to right 
piecewise-defined function  a function that is defined differently on different parts of its domain 
point-slope equation  equation of a linear function indicating its slope and a point on the graph of the function 
polynomial function  a function of the form 
power function  a function of the form  for any positive integer 
quadratic function  a polynomial of degree 2; that is, a function of the form  where 
radians  for a circular arc of length  on a circle of radius 1, the radian measure of the associated angle  is 
range  the set of outputs for a function 
rational function  a function of the form  where  and  are polynomials 
restricted domain  a subset of the domain of a function 
root function  a function of the form  for any integer 
slope  the change in y for each unit change in x 
slope-intercept form  equation of a linear function indicating its slope and y-intercept 
symmetry about the origin  the graph of a function  is symmetric about the origin if  is on the graph of 

whenever  is on the graph 
symmetry about the y-axis  the graph of a function  is symmetric about the -axis if  is on the graph of 

whenever  is on the graph 



100     1 • Chapter Review

table of values  a table containing a list of inputs and their corresponding outputs 
transcendental function  a function that cannot be expressed by a combination of basic arithmetic operations 
transformation of a function  a shift, scaling, or reflection of a function 
trigonometric functions  functions of an angle defined as ratios of the lengths of the sides of a right triangle 
trigonometric identity  an equation involving trigonometric functions that is true for all angles  for which the 

functions in the equation are defined 
vertical line test  given the graph of a function, every vertical line intersects the graph, at most, once 
zeros of a function  when a real number  is a zero of a function 

Key Equations 

Composition of two functions 

Absolute value function 

Point-slope equation of a line 

Slope-intercept form of a line 

Standard form of a line 

Polynomial function 

Generalized sine function 

Inverse functions 

Key Concepts 
1.1 Review of Functions 

• A function is a mapping from a set of inputs to a set of outputs with exactly one output for each input. 
• If no domain is stated for a function  the domain is considered to be the set of all real numbers  for 

which the function is defined. 
• When sketching the graph of a function  each vertical line may intersect the graph, at most, once. 
• A function may have any number of zeros, but it has, at most, one y-intercept. 
• To define the composition  the range of  must be contained in the domain of 
• Even functions are symmetric about the -axis whereas odd functions are symmetric about the origin. 

1.2 Basic Classes of Functions 
• The power function  is an even function if  is even and  and it is an odd function if  is odd. 
• The root function  has the domain ∞  if  is even and the domain ∞  if  is odd. If  is odd, 

then  is an odd function. 
• The domain of the rational function  where  and  are polynomial functions, is the set of 

 such that 
• Functions that involve the basic operations of addition, subtraction, multiplication, division, and powers are 

algebraic functions. All other functions are transcendental. Trigonometric, exponential, and logarithmic functions 
are examples of transcendental functions. 

• A polynomial function  with degree  satisfies ∞  as ∞  The sign of the output as ∞
depends on the sign of the leading coefficient only and on whether  is even or odd. 

• Vertical and horizontal shifts, vertical and horizontal scalings, and reflections about the - and -axes are examples 
of transformations of functions. 

1.3 Trigonometric Functions 
• Radian measure is defined such that the angle associated with the arc of length 1 on the unit circle has radian 

Access for free at openstax.org



1 • Chapter Review     101

measure 1. An angle with a degree measure of  has a radian measure of  rad. 
• For acute angles  the values of the trigonometric functions are defined as ratios of two sides of a right triangle in 

which one of the acute angles is 
• For a general angle  let  be a point on a circle of radius  corresponding to this angle  The trigonometric 

functions can be written as ratios involving  and 
• The trigonometric functions are periodic. The sine, cosine, secant, and cosecant functions have period  The 

tangent and cotangent functions have period 

1.4 Inverse Functions 
• For a function to have an inverse, the function must be one-to-one. Given the graph of a function, we can determine 

whether the function is one-to-one by using the horizontal line test. 
• If a function is not one-to-one, we can restrict the domain to a smaller domain where the function is one-to-one and 

then define the inverse of the function on the smaller domain. 
• For a function  and its inverse  for all  in the domain of  and  for all  in 

the domain of 
• Since the trigonometric functions are periodic, we need to restrict their domains to define the inverse trigonometric 

functions. 
• The graph of a function  and its inverse  are symmetric about the line 

1.5 Exponential and Logarithmic Functions 

• The exponential function  is increasing if  and decreasing if  Its domain is ∞ ∞  and its 
range is ∞

• The logarithmic function  is the inverse of  Its domain is ∞  and its range is ∞ ∞
• The natural exponential function is  and the natural logarithmic function is 
• Given an exponential function or logarithmic function in base  we can make a change of base to convert this 

function to any base  We typically convert to base 
• The hyperbolic functions involve combinations of the exponential functions  and  As a result, the inverse 

hyperbolic functions involve the natural logarithm. 

Review Exercises 
True or False? Justify your answer with a proof or a counterexample. 
310. A function is always one-  311 .  assuming f  312 . A relation that passes the 

to-one. and g are functions. horizontal and vertical 
line tests is a one-to-one 
function. 

313. A relation passing the 
horizontal line test is a 
function. 

For the following problems, state the domain and range of the given functions: 

314. h  315 . g  316 . 
317. 

Find the degree, y-intercept, and zeros for the following polynomial functions. 

318.  319 . 

Simplify the following trigonometric expressions. 

320.  321 . 



102     1 • Chapter Review

Solve the following trigonometric equations on the interval  exactly. 

322.  323 . 

Solve the following logarithmic equations. 
324.  325 . 

Are the following functions one-to-one over their domain of existence? Does the function have an inverse? If so, find the 
inverse  of the function. Justify your answer. 

326.  327 . 

For the following problems, determine the largest domain on which the function is one-to-one and find the inverse on 
that domain. 

328.  329 .  330 . A car is racing along a 
circular track with 
diameter of 1 mi. A 
trainer standing in the 
center of the circle marks 
his progress every 5 sec. 
After 5 sec, the trainer 
has to turn 55° to keep up 
with the car. How fast is 
the car traveling? 

For the following problems, consider a restaurant owner who wants to sell T-shirts advertising his brand. He recalls that 
there is a fixed cost and variable cost, although he does not remember the values. He does know that the T-shirt printing 
company charges $440 for 20 shirts and $1000 for 100 shirts. 
331. a. Find the equation  332 . a. Find the inverse 

 that describes function  and 
the total cost as a describe the meaning of 
function of number of this function. b. 
shirts and b. determine Determine how many 
how many shirts he must shirts the owner can buy 
sell to break even if he if he has $8000 to spend. 
sells the shirts for $10 
each. 

For the following problems, consider the population of Ocean City, New Jersey, which is cyclical by season. 
333. The population can be  334 . In reality, the overall population is 

modeled by most likely increasing or 
decreasing throughout each year. 

where  is time in months Let’s reformulate the model as 
 represents January 1) 

and  is population (in where  is time in months (
thousands). During a year, in represents January 1) and  is 
what intervals is the population (in thousands). When 
population less than 20,000? is the first time the population 
During what intervals is the reaches 200,000? 
population more than 
140,000? 

Access for free at openstax.org



1 • Chapter Review     103

For the following problems, consider radioactive dating. A human skeleton is found in an archeological dig. Carbon 
dating is implemented to determine how old the skeleton is by using the equation  where  is the ratio of 
radiocarbon still present in the material,  is the number of years passed, and  is the decay rate of 
radiocarbon. 
335. If the skeleton is expected  336 . Find the inverse of the 

to be 2000 years old, what carbon-dating equation. 
percentage of What does it mean? If 
radiocarbon should be there is 25% radiocarbon, 
present? how old is the skeleton? 



104     1 • Chapter Review

Access for free at openstax.org



2 • Introduction          105

2 LIMITS 

Figure 2.1 The vision of human exploration by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) to distant parts 
of the universe illustrates the idea of space travel at high speeds. But, is there a limit to how fast a spacecraft can go? 
(credit: NASA) 

Chapter Outline 
2.1 A Preview of Calculus 
2.2 The Limit of a Function 
2.3 The Limit Laws 
2.4 Continuity 
2.5 The Precise Definition of a Limit 

Introduction 
Science fiction writers often imagine spaceships that can travel to far-off planets in distant galaxies. However, back in 
1905, Albert Einstein showed that a limit exists to how fast any object can travel. The problem is that the faster an object 
moves, the more mass it attains (in the form of energy), according to the equation 

where m0 is the object’s mass at rest, v is its speed, and c is the speed of light. What is this speed limit? (We explore this 
problem further in Example 2.12.) 
The idea of a limit is central to all of calculus. We begin this chapter by examining why limits are so important. Then, we 



106     2 • Limits

go on to describe how to find the limit of a function at a given point. Not all functions have limits at all points, and we 
discuss what this means and how we can tell if a function does or does not have a limit at a particular value. This chapter 
has been created in an informal, intuitive fashion, but this is not always enough if we need to prove a mathematical 
statement involving limits. The last section of this chapter presents the more precise definition of a limit and shows how 
to prove whether a function has a limit. 

2.1 A Preview of Calculus 
Learning Objectives 

2.1.1 Describe the tangent problem and how it led to the idea of a derivative. 
2.1.2 Explain how the idea of a limit is involved in solving the tangent problem. 
2.1.3 Recognize a tangent to a curve at a point as the limit of secant lines. 
2.1.4 Identify instantaneous velocity as the limit of average velocity over a small time interval. 
2.1.5 Describe the area problem and how it was solved by the integral. 
2.1.6 Explain how the idea of a limit is involved in solving the area problem. 
2.1.7 Recognize how the ideas of limit, derivative, and integral led to the studies of infinite series and 

multivariable calculus. 
As we embark on our study of calculus, we shall see how its development arose from common solutions to practical 
problems in areas such as engineering physics—like the space travel problem posed in the chapter opener. Two key 
problems led to the initial formulation of calculus: (1) the tangent problem, or how to determine the slope of a line 
tangent to a curve at a point; and (2) the area problem, or how to determine the area under a curve. 

The Tangent Problem and Differential Calculus 
Rate of change is one of the most critical concepts in calculus. We begin our investigation of rates of change by looking 
at the graphs of the three lines  and  shown in Figure 2.2. 

Figure 2.2 The rate of change of a linear function is constant in each of these three graphs, with the constant 
determined by the slope. 
As we move from left to right along the graph of  we see that the graph decreases at a constant rate. 
For every 1 unit we move to the right along the x-axis, the y-coordinate decreases by 2 units. This rate of change is 
determined by the slope (−2) of the line. Similarly, the slope of 1/2 in the function  tells us that for every change in x 
of 1 unit there is a corresponding change in y of 1/2 unit. The function  has a slope of zero, indicating that the 
values of the function remain constant. We see that the slope of each linear function indicates the rate of change of the 
function. 

Compare the graphs of these three functions with the graph of  (Figure 2.3). The graph of  starts 
from the left by decreasing rapidly, then begins to decrease more slowly and level off, and then finally begins to 
increase—slowly at first, followed by an increasing rate of increase as it moves toward the right. Unlike a linear function, 
no single number represents the rate of change for this function. We quite naturally ask: How do we measure the rate of 
change of a nonlinear function? 

Access for free at openstax.org



2.1 • A Preview of Calculus     107

Figure 2.3 The function  does not have a constant rate of change. 
We can approximate the rate of change of a function  at a point  on its graph by taking another point 

 on the graph of  drawing a line through the two points, and calculating the slope of the resulting line. 
Such a line is called a secant line. Figure 2.4 shows a secant line to a function  at a point 

Figure 2.4 The slope of a secant line through a point  estimates the rate of change of the function at the point 

We formally define a secant line as follows: 

Definition 

The secant to the function  through the points  and  is the line passing through these points. 
Its slope is given by 

(2.1) 

The accuracy of approximating the rate of change of the function with a secant line depends on how close x is to a. As we 
see in Figure 2.5, if x is closer to a, the slope of the secant line is a better measure of the rate of change of  at a. 



108     2 • Limits

Figure 2.5 As x gets closer to a, the slope of the secant line becomes a better approximation to the rate of change of the 
function  at a. 
The secant lines themselves approach a line that is called the tangent to the function  at a (Figure 2.6). The slope of 
the tangent line to the graph at a measures the rate of change of the function at a. This value also represents the 
derivative of the function  at a, or the rate of change of the function at a. This derivative is denoted by 
Differential calculus is the field of calculus concerned with the study of derivatives and their applications. 

 MEDIA 

For an interactive demonstration of the slope of a secant line that you can manipulate yourself, visit this applet 
(Note: this site requires a Java browser plugin): Math Insight (http://www.openstax.org/l/20_mathinsight). 

Figure 2.6 Solving the Tangent Problem: As x approaches a, the secant lines approach the tangent line. 
Example 2.1 illustrates how to find slopes of secant lines. These slopes estimate the slope of the tangent line or, 
equivalently, the rate of change of the function at the point at which the slopes are calculated. 

EXAMPLE 2.1 

Finding Slopes of Secant Lines 
Estimate the slope of the tangent line (rate of change) to  at  by finding slopes of secant lines through 

 and each of the following points on the graph of 
a. 
b. 

Solution 
Use the formula for the slope of a secant line from the definition. 

Access for free at openstax.org



2.1 • A Preview of Calculus     109

a. 

b. 

The point in part b. is closer to the point  so the slope of 2.5 is closer to the slope of the tangent line. A good 
estimate for the slope of the tangent would be in the range of 2 to 2.5 (Figure 2.7). 

Figure 2.7 The secant lines to  at  through (a)  and (b)  provide successively closer 
approximations to the tangent line to  at 

 2.1 Estimate the slope of the tangent line (rate of change) to  at  by finding the slope of the 
secant line through  and the point  on the graph of 

We continue our investigation by exploring a related question. Keeping in mind that velocity may be thought of as the 
rate of change of position, suppose that we have a function,  that gives the position of an object along a coordinate 
axis at any given time t. Can we use these same ideas to create a reasonable definition of the instantaneous velocity at a 
given time  We start by approximating the instantaneous velocity with an average velocity. First, recall that the 
speed of an object traveling at a constant rate is the ratio of the distance traveled to the length of time it has traveled. 
We define the average velocity of an object over a time period to be the change in its position divided by the length of 
the time period. 

Definition 

Let  be the position of an object moving along a coordinate axis at time t. The average velocity of the object over 
a time interval  where  (or  if  is 

(2.2) 

As t is chosen closer to a, the average velocity becomes closer to the instantaneous velocity. Note that finding the 
average velocity of a position function over a time interval is essentially the same as finding the slope of a secant line to 
a function. Furthermore, to find the slope of a tangent line at a point a, we let the x-values approach a in the slope of the 
secant line. Similarly, to find the instantaneous velocity at time a, we let the t-values approach a in the average velocity. 
This process of letting x or t approach a in an expression is called taking a limit. Thus, we may define the instantaneous 
velocity as follows. 



110     2 • Limits

Definition 

For a position function  the instantaneous velocity at a time  is the value that the average velocities 
approach on intervals of the form  and  as the values of t become closer to a, provided such a value exists. 

Example 2.2 illustrates this concept of limits and average velocity. 

EXAMPLE 2.2 

Finding Average Velocity 
A rock is dropped from a height of 64 ft. It is determined that its height (in feet) above ground t seconds later (for 

 is given by  Find the average velocity of the rock over each of the given time intervals. Use 
this information to guess the instantaneous velocity of the rock at time 
a. 
b. 

Solution 
Substitute the data into the formula for the definition of average velocity. 

a. 
b. 

The instantaneous velocity is somewhere between −15.84 and −16.16 ft/sec. A good guess might be −16 ft/sec. 

 2.2 An object moves along a coordinate axis so that its position at time t is given by  Estimate its 
instantaneous velocity at time  by computing its average velocity over the time interval 

The Area Problem and Integral Calculus 
We now turn our attention to a classic question from calculus. Many quantities in physics—for example, quantities of 
work—may be interpreted as the area under a curve. This leads us to ask the question: How can we find the area 
between the graph of a function and the x-axis over an interval (Figure 2.8)? 

Figure 2.8 The Area Problem: How do we find the area of the shaded region? 
As in the answer to our previous questions on velocity, we first try to approximate the solution. We approximate the area 
by dividing up the interval  into smaller intervals in the shape of rectangles. The approximation of the area comes 
from adding up the areas of these rectangles (Figure 2.9). 

Access for free at openstax.org



2.1 • A Preview of Calculus     111

Figure 2.9 The area of the region under the curve is approximated by summing the areas of thin rectangles. 
As the widths of the rectangles become smaller (approach zero), the sums of the areas of the rectangles approach the 
area between the graph of  and the x-axis over the interval  Once again, we find ourselves taking a limit. 
Limits of this type serve as a basis for the definition of the definite integral. Integral calculus is the study of integrals 
and their applications. 

EXAMPLE 2.3 

Estimation Using Rectangles 
Estimate the area between the x-axis and the graph of  over the interval  by using the three 
rectangles shown in Figure 2.10. 

Figure 2.10 The area of the region under the curve of  can be estimated using rectangles. 

Solution 
The areas of the three rectangles are 1 unit2, 2 unit2, and 5 unit2. Using these rectangles, our area estimate is 8 unit2. 

 2.3 Estimate the area between the x-axis and the graph of  over the interval  by using the 
three rectangles shown here: 



112     2 • Limits

Other Aspects of Calculus 
So far, we have studied functions of one variable only. Such functions can be represented visually using graphs in two 
dimensions; however, there is no good reason to restrict our investigation to two dimensions. Suppose, for example, that 
instead of determining the velocity of an object moving along a coordinate axis, we want to determine the velocity of a 
rock fired from a catapult at a given time, or of an airplane moving in three dimensions. We might want to graph real-
value functions of two variables or determine volumes of solids of the type shown in Figure 2.11. These are only a few of 
the types of questions that can be asked and answered using multivariable calculus. Informally, multivariable calculus 
can be characterized as the study of the calculus of functions of two or more variables. However, before exploring these 
and other ideas, we must first lay a foundation for the study of calculus in one variable by exploring the concept of a 
limit. 

Figure 2.11 We can use multivariable calculus to find the volume between a surface defined by a function of two 
variables and a plane. 

Access for free at openstax.org



2.1 • A Preview of Calculus     113

 SECTION 2.1 EXERCISES 
For the following exercises, points  and  are on the graph of the function 
1 . [T] Complete the following table  2 . Use the values in the right  3 . Use the value in the 

with the appropriate values: column of the table in the preceding exercise to find 
y-coordinate of Q, the point preceding exercise to guess an equation of the tangent 

 and the slope of the the value of the slope of the line at point P. Graph 
secant line passing through line tangent to f at and the tangent line. 
points P and Q. Round your 
answer to eight significant 
digits. 

x y msec 

1.1 a. e. i. 

1.01 b. f. j. 

1.001 c. g. k. 

1.0001 d. h. l. 

For the following exercises, points  and  are on the graph of the function 
4 . [T] Complete the following table  5 . Use the values in the right  6 . Use the value in the 

with the appropriate values: column of the table in the preceding exercise to find 
y-coordinate of Q, the point preceding exercise to guess an equation of the tangent 

 and the slope of the the value of the slope of the line at point P. Graph 
secant line passing through tangent line to f at and the tangent line. 
points P and Q. Round your 
answer to eight significant 
digits. 

x y msec 

1.1 a. e. i. 

1.01 b. f. j. 

1.001 c. g. k. 

1.0001 d. h. l. 



114     2 • Limits

For the following exercises, points  and  are on the graph of the function 

7 . [T] Complete the following table  8 . Use the values in the right  9 . Use the value in the 
with the appropriate values: column of the table in the preceding exercise to find 
y-coordinate of Q, the point preceding exercise to guess an equation of the tangent 

 and the slope of the the value of the slope of the line at point P. 
secant line passing through tangent line to f at 
points P and Q. Round your 
answer to eight significant 
digits. 

x y msec 

4.1 a. e. i. 

4.01 b. f. j. 

4.001 c. g. k. 

4.0001 d. h. l. 

For the following exercises, points  and  are on the graph of the function 
10 . [T] Complete the following table  11 . Use the values in the right  12 . Use the value in the 

with the appropriate values: column of the table in the preceding exercise to find 
y-coordinate of Q, the point preceding exercise to an equation of the tangent 

 and the slope of the guess the value of the line at point P. 
secant line passing through slope of the tangent line to 
points P and Q. Round your f at 
answer to eight significant 
digits. 

ϕ y msec 

1.4 a. e. i. 

1.49 b. f. j. 

1.499 c. g. k. 

1.4999 d. h. l. 

Access for free at openstax.org



2.1 • A Preview of Calculus     115

For the following exercises, points  and  are on the graph of the function 

13 . [T] Complete the following table  14 . Use the values in the right  15 . Use the value in the 
with the appropriate values: column of the table in the preceding exercise to find 
y-coordinate of Q, the point preceding exercise to an equation of the tangent 

 and the slope of the guess the value of the line at point P. 
secant line passing through slope of the line tangent to 
points P and Q. Round your f at 
answer to eight significant 
digits. 

x y msec 

−1.05 a. e. i. 

−1.01 b. f. j. 

−1.005 c. g. k. 

−1.001 d. h. l. 

For the following exercises, the position function of a ball dropped from the top of a 200-meter tall building is given by 
 where position s is measured in meters and time t is measured in seconds. Round your answer to 

eight significant digits. 
16 . [T] Compute the average  17 . Use the preceding exercise 

velocity of the ball over the to guess the instantaneous 
given time intervals. velocity of the ball at 
a. sec. 
b. 
c. 
d. 

For the following exercises, consider a stone tossed into the air from ground level with an initial velocity of 15 m/sec. Its 
height in meters at time t seconds is 
18 . [T] Compute the average  19 . Use the preceding exercise 

velocity of the stone over to guess the instantaneous 
the given time intervals. velocity of the stone at 
a.  sec. 
b. 
c. 
d. 

For the following exercises, consider a rocket shot into the air that then returns to Earth. The height of the rocket in 
meters is given by  where t is measured in seconds. 
20 . [T] Compute the average  21 . Use the preceding exercise 

velocity of the rocket over to guess the instantaneous 
the given time intervals. velocity of the rocket at 
a.  sec. 
b. 
c. 
d. 



116     2 • Limits

For the following exercises, consider an athlete running a 40-m dash. The position of the athlete is given by 
 where d is the position in meters and t is the time elapsed, measured in seconds. 

22 . [T] Compute the average  23 . Use the preceding exercise 
velocity of the runner over to guess the instantaneous 
the given time intervals. velocity of the runner at 
a.  sec. 
b. 
c. 
d. 

For the following exercises, consider the function 
24 . Sketch the graph of f over  25 . Use the preceding exercise 

the interval  and to find the aproximate 
shade the region above the value of the area between 
x-axis. the x-axis and the graph of 

f over the interval 
using rectangles. For the 
rectangles, use the square 
units, and approximate 
both above and below the 
lines. Use geometry to find 
the exact answer. 

For the following exercises, consider the function  (Hint: This is the upper half of a circle of radius 1 
positioned at 
26 . Sketch the graph of f over  27 . Use the preceding exercise 

the interval to find the aproximate area 
between the x-axis and the 
graph of f over the interval 

 using rectangles. 
For the rectangles, use 
squares 0.4 by 0.4 units, 
and approximate both 
above and below the lines. 
Use geometry to find the 
exact answer. 

For the following exercises, consider the function 
28 . Sketch the graph of f over  29 . Approximate the area of 

the interval the region between the 
x-axis and the graph of f 
over the interval 

2.2 The Limit of a Function 
Learning Objectives 

2.2.1 Using correct notation, describe the limit of a function. 
2.2.2 Use a table of values to estimate the limit of a function or to identify when the limit does not exist. 
2.2.3 Use a graph to estimate the limit of a function or to identify when the limit does not exist. 
2.2.4 Define one-sided limits and provide examples. 
2.2.5 Explain the relationship between one-sided and two-sided limits. 
2.2.6 Using correct notation, describe an infinite limit. 
2.2.7 Define a vertical asymptote. 

The concept of a limit or limiting process, essential to the understanding of calculus, has been around for thousands of 
years. In fact, early mathematicians used a limiting process to obtain better and better approximations of areas of 

Access for free at openstax.org



2.2 • The Limit of a Function     117

circles. Yet, the formal definition of a limit—as we know and understand it today—did not appear until the late 19th 
century. We therefore begin our quest to understand limits, as our mathematical ancestors did, by using an intuitive 
approach. At the end of this chapter, armed with a conceptual understanding of limits, we examine the formal definition 
of a limit. 
We begin our exploration of limits by taking a look at the graphs of the functions 

which are shown in Figure 2.12. In particular, let’s focus our attention on the behavior of each graph at and around 

Figure 2.12 These graphs show the behavior of three different functions around 
Each of the three functions is undefined at  but if we make this statement and no other, we give a very incomplete 
picture of how each function behaves in the vicinity of  To express the behavior of each graph in the vicinity of 2 
more completely, we need to introduce the concept of a limit. 

Intuitive Definition of a Limit 
Let’s first take a closer look at how the function  behaves around  in Figure 2.12. As the 
values of x approach 2 from either side of 2, the values of  approach 4. Mathematically, we say that the limit of 

 as x approaches 2 is 4. Symbolically, we express this limit as 

From this very brief informal look at one limit, let’s start to develop an intuitive definition of the limit. We can think of 
the limit of a function at a number a as being the one real number L that the functional values approach as the x-values 
approach a, provided such a real number L exists. Stated more carefully, we have the following definition: 

Definition 

Let  be a function defined at all values in an open interval containing a, with the possible exception of a itself, and 
let L be a real number. If all values of the function  approach the real number L as the values of  approach 
the number a, then we say that the limit of  as x approaches a is L. (More succinct, as x gets closer to a,  gets 
closer and stays close to L.) Symbolically, we express this idea as 

(2.3) 

We can estimate limits by constructing tables of functional values and by looking at their graphs. This process is 
described in the following Problem-Solving Strategy. 



118     2 • Limits

Problem-Solving Strategy 

Evaluating a Limit Using a Table of Functional Values 
1. To evaluate  we begin by completing a table of functional values. We should choose two sets of 

x-values—one set of values approaching a and less than a, and another set of values approaching a and greater 
than a. Table 2.1 demonstrates what your tables might look like. 

x x 

Use additional values as necessary. Use additional values as necessary. 

Table 2.1 Table of Functional Values for 

2. Next, let’s look at the values in each of the  columns and determine whether the values seem to be 
approaching a single value as we move down each column. In our columns, we look at the sequence 

 and so on, and 
 and so on. (Note: Although we have chosen the x-values 

 and so forth, and these values will probably work nearly every time, on 
very rare occasions we may need to modify our choices.) 

3. If both columns approach a common y-value L, we state  We can use the following strategy to 
confirm the result obtained from the table or as an alternative method for estimating a limit. 

4. Using a graphing calculator or computer software that allows us to graph functions, we can plot the function 
 making sure the functional values of  for x-values near a are in our window. We can use the trace 

feature to move along the graph of the function and watch the y-value readout as the x-values approach a. If the 
y-values approach L as our x-values approach a from both directions, then  We may need to zoom 
in on our graph and repeat this process several times. 

We apply this Problem-Solving Strategy to compute a limit in Example 2.4. 

EXAMPLE 2.4 

Evaluating a Limit Using a Table of Functional Values 1 
Evaluate  using a table of functional values. 

Solution 
We have calculated the values of  for the values of x listed in Table 2.2. 

Access for free at openstax.org



2.2 • The Limit of a Function     119

x x 

−0.1 0.998334166468 0.1 0.998334166468 

−0.01 0.999983333417 0.01 0.999983333417 

−0.001 0.999999833333 0.001 0.999999833333 

−0.0001 0.999999998333 0.0001 0.999999998333 

Table 2.2 Table of Functional Values for 

Note: The values in this table were obtained using a calculator and using all the places given in the calculator output. 

As we read down each  column, we see that the values in each column appear to be approaching one. Thus, it is 
fairly reasonable to conclude that  A calculator or computer-generated graph of  would be 
similar to that shown in Figure 2.13, and it confirms our estimate. 

Figure 2.13 The graph of  confirms the estimate from Table 2.2. 

EXAMPLE 2.5 

Evaluating a Limit Using a Table of Functional Values 2 
Evaluate  using a table of functional values. 

Solution 
As before, we use a table—in this case, Table 2.3—to list the values of the function for the given values of x. 

x x 

3.9 0.251582341869 4.1 0.248456731317 

3.99 0.25015644562 4.01 0.24984394501 

3.999 0.250015627 4.001 0.249984377 

Table 2.3 Table of Functional Values for 



120     2 • Limits

x x 

3.9999 0.250001563 4.0001 0.249998438 

3.99999 0.25000016 4.00001 0.24999984 

Table 2.3 Table of Functional Values for 

After inspecting this table, we see that the functional values less than 4 appear to be decreasing toward 0.25 whereas 
the functional values greater than 4 appear to be increasing toward 0.25. We conclude that  We 

confirm this estimate using the graph of  shown in Figure 2.14. 

Figure 2.14 The graph of  confirms the estimate from Table 2.3. 

 2.4 Estimate  using a table of functional values. Use a graph to confirm your estimate. 

At this point, we see from Example 2.4 and Example 2.5 that it may be just as easy, if not easier, to estimate a limit of a 
function by inspecting its graph as it is to estimate the limit by using a table of functional values. In Example 2.6, we 
evaluate a limit exclusively by looking at a graph rather than by using a table of functional values. 

EXAMPLE 2.6 

Evaluating a Limit Using a Graph 
For  shown in Figure 2.15, evaluate 

Access for free at openstax.org



2.2 • The Limit of a Function     121

Figure 2.15 The graph of  includes one value not on a smooth curve. 

Solution 
Despite the fact that  as the x-values approach −1 from either side, the  values approach 3. Therefore, 

 Note that we can determine this limit without even knowing the algebraic expression of the function. 

Based on Example 2.6, we make the following observation: It is possible for the limit of a function to exist at a point, and 
for the function to be defined at this point, but the limit of the function and the value of the function at the point may be 
different. 

 2.5 Use the graph of  in Figure 2.16 to evaluate  if possible. 

Figure 2.16 

Looking at a table of functional values or looking at the graph of a function provides us with useful insight into the value 
of the limit of a function at a given point. However, these techniques rely too much on guesswork. We eventually need to 
develop alternative methods of evaluating limits. These new methods are more algebraic in nature and we explore them 
in the next section; however, at this point we introduce two special limits that are foundational to the techniques to 
come. 



122     2 • Limits

Theorem 2.1 

Two Important Limits 
Let a be a real number and c be a constant. 

i. (2.4) 

ii. (2.5) 

We can make the following observations about these two limits. 
i. For the first limit, observe that as x approaches a, so does  because  Consequently, 
ii. For the second limit, consider Table 2.4. 

x x 

c c 

c c 

c c 

c c 

Table 2.4 Table of Functional Values for 

Observe that for all values of x (regardless of whether they are approaching a), the values  remain constant at c. We 
have no choice but to conclude 

The Existence of a Limit 
As we consider the limit in the next example, keep in mind that for the limit of a function to exist at a point, the 
functional values must approach a single real-number value at that point. If the functional values do not approach a 
single value, then the limit does not exist. 

EXAMPLE 2.7 

Evaluating a Limit That Fails to Exist 
Evaluate  using a table of values. 

Solution 
Table 2.5 lists values for the function  for the given values of x. 

x x 

−0.1 0.544021110889 0.1 −0.544021110889 

−0.01 0.50636564111 0.01 −0.50636564111 

−0.001 −0.8268795405312 0.001 0.826879540532 

−0.0001 0.305614388888 0.0001 −0.305614388888 

Table 2.5 Table of Functional Values for 

Access for free at openstax.org



2.2 • The Limit of a Function     123

x x 

−0.00001 −0.035748797987 0.00001 0.035748797987 

−0.000001 0.349993504187 0.000001 −0.349993504187 

Table 2.5 Table of Functional Values for 

After examining the table of functional values, we can see that the y-values do not seem to approach any one single 
value. It appears the limit does not exist. Before drawing this conclusion, let’s take a more systematic approach. Take the 
following sequence of x-values approaching 0: 

The corresponding y-values are 

At this point we can indeed conclude that  does not exist. (Mathematicians frequently abbreviate “does not 
exist” as DNE. Thus, we would write  DNE.) The graph of  is shown in Figure 2.17 and it gives 
a clearer picture of the behavior of  as x approaches 0. You can see that  oscillates ever more wildly 
between −1 and 1 as x approaches 0. 

Figure 2.17 The graph of  oscillates rapidly between −1 and 1 as x approaches 0. 

 2.6 Use a table of functional values to evaluate  if possible. 

One-Sided Limits 
Sometimes indicating that the limit of a function fails to exist at a point does not provide us with enough information 
about the behavior of the function at that particular point. To see this, we now revisit the function 

 introduced at the beginning of the section (see Figure 2.12(b)). As we pick values of x close to 2, 
 does not approach a single value, so the limit as x approaches 2 does not exist—that is,  DNE. However, this 

statement alone does not give us a complete picture of the behavior of the function around the x-value 2. To provide a 
more accurate description, we introduce the idea of a one-sided limit. For all values to the left of 2 (or the negative side 
of 2),  Thus, as x approaches 2 from the left,  approaches −1. Mathematically, we say that the limit as x 
approaches 2 from the left is −1. Symbolically, we express this idea as 



124     2 • Limits

Similarly, as x approaches 2 from the right (or from the positive side),  approaches 1. Symbolically, we express this 
idea as 

We can now present an informal definition of one-sided limits. 

Definition 

We define two types of one-sided limits. 

Limit from the left: Let  be a function defined at all values in an open interval of the form (c, a), and let L be a real 
number. If the values of the function  approach the real number L as the values of x (where  approach the 
number a, then we say that L is the limit of  as x approaches a from the left. Symbolically, we express this idea as 

(2.6) 

Limit from the right: Let  be a function defined at all values in an open interval of the form  and let L be a 
real number. If the values of the function  approach the real number L as the values of x (where  approach 
the number a, then we say that L is the limit of  as x approaches a from the right. Symbolically, we express this 
idea as 

(2.7) 

EXAMPLE 2.8 

Evaluating One-Sided Limits 

For the function  evaluate each of the following limits. 

a. 

b. 

Solution 
We can use tables of functional values again Table 2.6. Observe that for values of x less than 2, we use  and 
for values of x greater than 2, we use 

x x 

1.9 2.9 2.1 0.41 

1.99 2.99 2.01 0.0401 

1.999 2.999 2.001 0.004001 

1.9999 2.9999 2.0001 0.00040001 

1.99999 2.99999 2.00001 0.0000400001 

Table 2.6 Table of Functional Values for 

Based on this table, we can conclude that a.  and b.  Therefore, the (two-sided) limit of 

Access for free at openstax.org



2.2 • The Limit of a Function     125

 does not exist at  Figure 2.18 shows a graph of  and reinforces our conclusion about these limits. 

Figure 2.18 The graph of  has a break at 

 2.7 Use a table of functional values to estimate the following limits, if possible. 

a. 

b. 

Let us now consider the relationship between the limit of a function at a point and the limits from the right and left at 
that point. It seems clear that if the limit from the right and the limit from the left have a common value, then that 
common value is the limit of the function at that point. Similarly, if the limit from the left and the limit from the right take 
on different values, the limit of the function does not exist. These conclusions are summarized in Relating One-Sided and 
Two-Sided Limits. 

Theorem 2.2 

Relating One-Sided and Two-Sided Limits 
Let  be a function defined at all values in an open interval containing a, with the possible exception of a itself, and 
let L be a real number. Then, 

Infinite Limits 
Evaluating the limit of a function at a point or evaluating the limit of a function from the right and left at a point helps us 
to characterize the behavior of a function around a given value. As we shall see, we can also describe the behavior of 
functions that do not have finite limits. 

We now turn our attention to  the third and final function introduced at the beginning of this section 
(see Figure 2.12(c)). From its graph we see that as the values of x approach 2, the values of  become 
larger and larger and, in fact, become infinite. Mathematically, we say that the limit of  as x approaches 2 is positive 
infinity. Symbolically, we express this idea as 



126     2 • Limits

∞

More generally, we define infinite limits as follows: 

Definition 

We define three types of infinite limits. 

Infinite limits from the left: Let  be a function defined at all values in an open interval of the form 

i. If the values of  increase without bound as the values of x (where  approach the number a, then we 
say that the limit as x approaches a from the left is positive infinity and we write 

∞ (2.8) 

ii. If the values of  decrease without bound as the values of x (where  approach the number a, then we 
say that the limit as x approaches a from the left is negative infinity and we write 

∞ (2.9) 

Infinite limits from the right: Let  be a function defined at all values in an open interval of the form 

i. If the values of  increase without bound as the values of x (where  approach the number a, then we 
say that the limit as x approaches a from the right is positive infinity and we write 

∞ (2.10) 

ii. If the values of  decrease without bound as the values of x (where  approach the number a, then we 
say that the limit as x approaches a from the right is negative infinity and we write 

∞ (2.11) 

Two-sided infinite limit: Let  be defined for all  in an open interval containing a. 

i. If the values of  increase without bound as the values of x (where  approach the number a, then we 
say that the limit as x approaches a is positive infinity and we write 

∞ (2.12) 

ii. If the values of  decrease without bound as the values of x (where  approach the number a, then we 
say that the limit as x approaches a is negative infinity and we write 

∞ (2.13) 

It is important to understand that when we write statements such as ∞  or ∞  we are 
describing the behavior of the function, as we have just defined it. We are not asserting that a limit exists. For the limit of 
a function  to exist at a, it must approach a real number L as x approaches a. That said, if, for example, 

∞  we always write ∞  rather than  DNE. 

EXAMPLE 2.9 

Recognizing an Infinite Limit 
Evaluate each of the following limits, if possible. Use a table of functional values and graph  to confirm your 
conclusion. 

a. 

b. 

c. 

Access for free at openstax.org



2.2 • The Limit of a Function     127

Solution 
Begin by constructing a table of functional values. 

x x 

−0.1 −10 0.1 10 

−0.01 −100 0.01 100 

−0.001 −1000 0.001 1000 

−0.0001 −10,000 0.0001 10,000 

−0.00001 −100,000 0.00001 100,000 

−0.000001 −1,000,000 0.000001 1,000,000 

Table 2.7 Table of Functional Values for 

a. The values of  decrease without bound as x approaches 0 from the left. We conclude that 
∞

b. The values of  increase without bound as x approaches 0 from the right. We conclude that 
∞

c. Since ∞  and ∞  have different values, we conclude that 

The graph of  in Figure 2.19 confirms these conclusions. 

Figure 2.19 The graph of  confirms that the limit as x approaches 0 does not exist. 

 2.8 Evaluate each of the following limits, if possible. Use a table of functional values and graph  to 
confirm your conclusion. 



128     2 • Limits

a. 

b. 

c. 

It is useful to point out that functions of the form  where n is a positive integer, have infinite limits as x 
approaches a from either the left or right (Figure 2.20). These limits are summarized in Infinite Limits from Positive 
Integers. 

Figure 2.20 The function  has infinite limits at a. 

Theorem 2.3 

Infinite Limits from Positive Integers 
If n is a positive even integer, then 

∞

If n is a positive odd integer, then 

∞

and 

∞

We should also point out that in the graphs of  points on the graph having x-coordinates very near to 
a are very close to the vertical line  That is, as x approaches a, the points on the graph of  are closer to the line 

 The line  is called a vertical asymptote of the graph. We formally define a vertical asymptote as follows: 

Definition 

Let  be a function. If any of the following conditions hold, then the line  is a vertical asymptote of 

Access for free at openstax.org



2.2 • The Limit of a Function     129

∞

∞

∞

EXAMPLE 2.10 

Finding a Vertical Asymptote 
Evaluate each of the following limits using Infinite Limits from Positive Integers. Identify any vertical asymptotes of the 
function 

a. 

b. 

c. 

Solution 
We can use Infinite Limits from Positive Integers directly. 

a. ∞

b. ∞

c. ∞

The function  has a vertical asymptote of 

 2.9 Evaluate each of the following limits. Identify any vertical asymptotes of the function 

a. 

b. 

c. 

In the next example we put our knowledge of various types of limits to use to analyze the behavior of a function at 
several different points. 

EXAMPLE 2.11 

Behavior of a Function at Different Points 
Use the graph of  in Figure 2.21 to determine each of the following values: 
a. 

b. 

c. 

d. 



130     2 • Limits

Figure 2.21 The graph shows 

Solution 
Using Infinite Limits from Positive Integers and the graph for reference, we arrive at the following values: 
a. 

b.  is undefined 

c.  DNE; 

d. ∞ ∞ ∞  is undefined 

 2.10 Evaluate  for  shown here: 

Access for free at openstax.org



2.2 • The Limit of a Function     131

EXAMPLE 2.12 

Chapter Opener: Einstein’s Equation 

Figure 2.22 (credit: NASA) 
In the chapter opener we mentioned briefly how Albert Einstein showed that a limit exists to how fast any object can 
travel. Given Einstein’s equation for the mass of a moving object, what is the value of this bound? 

Solution 
Our starting point is Einstein’s equation for the mass of a moving object, 

where  is the object’s mass at rest, v is its speed, and c is the speed of light. To see how the mass changes at high 
speeds, we can graph the ratio of masses  as a function of the ratio of speeds,  (Figure 2.23). 

Figure 2.23 This graph shows the ratio of masses as a function of the ratio of speeds in Einstein’s equation for the mass 
of a moving object. 
We can see that as the ratio of speeds approaches 1—that is, as the speed of the object approaches the speed of 
light—the ratio of masses increases without bound. In other words, the function has a vertical asymptote at  We 
can try a few values of this ratio to test this idea. 

0.99 0.1411 7.089 

0.999 0.0447 22.37 

0.9999 0.0141 70.71 

Table 2.8 Ratio of Masses and 
Speeds for a Moving Object 



132     2 • Limits

Thus, according to Table 2.8, if an object with mass 100 kg is traveling at 0.9999c, its mass becomes 7071 kg. Since no 
object can have an infinite mass, we conclude that no object can travel at or more than the speed of light. 

 SECTION 2.2 EXERCISES 
For the following exercises, consider the function 

30 . [T] Complete the following table for  31 . What do your results in the 
the function. Round your solutions to preceding exercise indicate 
four decimal places. about the two-sided limit 

 Explain your 
x x response. 

0.9 a. 1.1 e. 

0.99 b. 1.01 f. 

0.999 c. 1.001 g. 

0.9999 d. 1.0001 h. 

For the following exercises, consider the function 
32 . [T] Make a table showing the values of f  33 . What does the table of  34 . To which mathematical 

for values in the preceding constant does the limit in 
exercise indicate about the the preceding exercise 

and for function appear to be getting 
Round your solutions to five decimal closer? 
places. 

x x 

−0.01 a. 0.01 e. 

−0.001 b. 0.001 f. 

−0.0001 c. 0.0001 g. 

−0.00001 d. 0.00001 h. 

Access for free at openstax.org



2.2 • The Limit of a Function     133

In the following exercises, use the given values to set up a table to evaluate the limits. Round your solutions to eight 
decimal places. 

35 . [T]  36. [T]  ±0.1, ±0.01, ±0.001, 
±0.0001 

x x X x 

−0.1 a. 0.1 e. −0.1 a. 0.1 e. 

−0.01 b. 0.01 f. −0.01 b. 0.01 f. 

−0.001 c. 0.001 g. −0.001 c. 0.001 g. 

−0.0001 d. 0.0001 h. −0.0001 d. 0.0001 h. 

37 . Use the preceding two 
exercises to conjecture 
(guess) the value of the 
following limit: 
for a, a positive real value. 

[T] In the following exercises, set up a table of values to find the indicated limit. Round to eight digits. 

38 .  39 . 

x x x x 

0.9 a. 1.1 e. 
1.9 a. 2.1 e. 

0.99 b. 1.01 f. 
1.99 b. 2.01 f. 

0.999 c. 1.001 g. 
1.999 c. 2.001 g. 

0.9999 d. 1.0001 h. 
1.9999 d. 2.0001 h. 

40 .  41 . 

x x z z 

−0.1 a. 0.1 e. −0.1 a. 0.1 e. 

−0.01 b. 0.01 f. −0.01 b. 0.01 f. 

−0.001 c. 0.001 g. −0.001 c. 0.001 g. 

−0.0001 d. 0.0001 h. −0.0001 d. 0.0001 h. 



134     2 • Limits

42 .  43 . 

t x x 

0.1 a. 
1.9 a. 2.1 e. 

0.01 b. 
1.99 b. 2.01 f. 

0.001 c. 
1.999 c. 2.001 g. 

0.0001 d. 
1.9999 d. 2.0001 h. 

[T] In the following exercises, set up a table of values and round to eight significant digits. Based on the table of values, 
make a guess about what the limit is. Then, use a calculator to graph the function and determine the limit. Was the 
conjecture correct? If not, why does the method of tables fail? 

44 .  45 . 

θ θ 

−0.1 a. 0.1 e. 0.1 a. 

−0.01 b. 0.01 f. 0.01 b. 

−0.001 c. 0.001 g. 0.001 c. 

−0.0001 d. 0.0001 h. 0.0001 d. 

Access for free at openstax.org



2.2 • The Limit of a Function     135

In the following exercises, consider the graph of the function  shown here. Which of the statements about 
 are true and which are false? Explain why a statement is false. 

 46 . 

47 .  48 .  49 . 

In the following exercises, use the following graph of the function  to find the values, if possible. Estimate when 
necessary. 

 50 . 

51 .  52 .  53 . 

54 . 



136     2 • Limits

In the following exercises, use the graph of the function  shown here to find the values, if possible. Estimate 
when necessary. 

 55 . 

56 .  57 .  58 . 

In the following exercises, use the graph of the function  shown here to find the values, if possible. Estimate 
when necessary. 

 59 . 

60 .  61 .  62 . 

63 .  64 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



2.2 • The Limit of a Function     137

In the following exercises, use the graph of the function  shown here to find the values, if possible. Estimate 
when necessary. 

 65 . 

66 .  67 . 

In the following exercises, use the graph of the function  shown here to find the values, if possible. Estimate 
when necessary. 

 68 . 

69 .  70 . 



138     2 • Limits

In the following exercises, use the graph of the function  shown here to find the values, if possible. Estimate 
when necessary. 

 71 . 

72 .  73 .  74 . 

75 . 

In the following exercises, sketch the graph of a function with the given properties. 
76 . 

is not defined. 

77 . ∞ ∞

∞ ∞ ∞

78 . ∞ ∞  79 . ∞ ∞
∞ ∞ ∞

Access for free at openstax.org



2.2 • The Limit of a Function     139

80 . ∞ ∞ ∞  81 . Shock waves arise in many 
physical applications, ranging 

∞ ∞ ∞ from supernovas to detonation 
waves. A graph of the density 
of a shock wave with respect to 
distance, x, is shown here. We 
are mainly interested in the 
location of the front of the 
shock, labeled  in the 
diagram. 

a. Evaluate 

b. Evaluate 

c. Evaluate 

Explain the physical 
meanings behind your 
answers. 



140     2 • Limits

82 . A track coach uses a 
camera with a fast shutter 
to estimate the position of 
a runner with respect to 
time. A table of the values 
of position of the athlete 
versus time is given here, 
where x is the position in 
meters of the runner and t 
is time in seconds. What is 

 What does it 
mean physically? 

t (sec) x (m) 

1.75 4.5 

1.95 6.1 

1.99 6.42 

2.01 6.58 

2.05 6.9 

2.25 8.5 

2.3 The Limit Laws 
Learning Objectives 

2.3.1 Recognize the basic limit laws. 
2.3.2 Use the limit laws to evaluate the limit of a function. 
2.3.3 Evaluate the limit of a function by factoring. 
2.3.4 Use the limit laws to evaluate the limit of a polynomial or rational function. 
2.3.5 Evaluate the limit of a function by factoring or by using conjugates. 
2.3.6 Evaluate the limit of a function by using the squeeze theorem. 

In the previous section, we evaluated limits by looking at graphs or by constructing a table of values. In this section, we 
establish laws for calculating limits and learn how to apply these laws. In the Student Project at the end of this section, 
you have the opportunity to apply these limit laws to derive the formula for the area of a circle by adapting a method 
devised by the Greek mathematician Archimedes. We begin by restating two useful limit results from the previous 
section. These two results, together with the limit laws, serve as a foundation for calculating many limits. 

Evaluating Limits with the Limit Laws 
The first two limit laws were stated in Two Important Limits and we repeat them here. These basic results, together with 
the other limit laws, allow us to evaluate limits of many algebraic functions. 

Theorem 2.4 

Basic Limit Results 
For any real number a and any constant c, 

i. (2.14) 

ii. (2.15) 

Access for free at openstax.org



2.3 • The Limit Laws     141

EXAMPLE 2.13 

Evaluating a Basic Limit 
Evaluate each of the following limits using Basic Limit Results. 
a. 
b. 

Solution 
a. The limit of x as x approaches a is a: 
b. The limit of a constant is that constant: 

We now take a look at the limit laws, the individual properties of limits. The proofs that these laws hold are omitted 
here. 

Theorem 2.5 

Limit Laws 
Let  and  be defined for all  over some open interval containing a. Assume that L and M are real 
numbers such that  and  Let c be a constant. Then, each of the following statements 
holds: 

Sum law for limits: 

Difference law for limits: 

Constant multiple law for limits: 

Product law for limits: 

Quotient law for limits:  for 

Power law for limits:  for every positive integer n. 

Root law for limits:  for all L if n is odd and for  if n is even and . 

We now practice applying these limit laws to evaluate a limit. 

EXAMPLE 2.14 

Evaluating a Limit Using Limit Laws 
Use the limit laws to evaluate 

Solution 
Let’s apply the limit laws one step at a time to be sure we understand how they work. We need to keep in mind the 
requirement that, at each application of a limit law, the new limits must exist for the limit law to be applied. 



142     2 • Limits

EXAMPLE 2.15 

Using Limit Laws Repeatedly 
Use the limit laws to evaluate 

Solution 
To find this limit, we need to apply the limit laws several times. Again, we need to keep in mind that as we rewrite the 
limit in terms of other limits, each new limit must exist for the limit law to be applied. 

 2.11 Use the limit laws to evaluate  In each step, indicate the limit law applied. 

Limits of Polynomial and Rational Functions 
By now you have probably noticed that, in each of the previous examples, it has been the case that 
This is not always true, but it does hold for all polynomials for any choice of a and for all rational functions at all values of 
a for which the rational function is defined. 

Theorem 2.6 

Limits of Polynomial and Rational Functions 
Let  and  be polynomial functions. Let a be a real number. Then, 

To see that this theorem holds, consider the polynomial  By applying the sum, 
constant multiple, and power laws, we end up with 

It now follows from the quotient law that if  and  are polynomials for which  then 

Access for free at openstax.org



2.3 • The Limit Laws     143

Example 2.16 applies this result. 

EXAMPLE 2.16 

Evaluating a Limit of a Rational Function 
Evaluate the 

Solution 
Since 3 is in the domain of the rational function  we can calculate the limit by substituting 3 for x into 
the function. Thus, 

 2.12 Evaluate 

Additional Limit Evaluation Techniques 
As we have seen, we may evaluate easily the limits of polynomials and limits of some (but not all) rational functions by 
direct substitution. However, as we saw in the introductory section on limits, it is certainly possible for  to exist 
when  is undefined. The following observation allows us to evaluate many limits of this type: 
If for all  over some open interval containing a, then 

To understand this idea better, consider the limit 

The function 

and the function  are identical for all values of  The graphs of these two functions are shown in Figure 
2.24. 

Figure 2.24 The graphs of  and  are identical for all  Their limits at 1 are equal. 
We see that 



144     2 • Limits

The limit has the form  where  and  (In this case, we say that  has the 
indeterminate form  The following Problem-Solving Strategy provides a general outline for evaluating limits of this 
type. 

Problem-Solving Strategy 

Calculating a Limit When  has the Indeterminate Form 0/0 
1. First, we need to make sure that our function has the appropriate form and cannot be evaluated immediately 

using the limit laws. 
2. We then need to find a function that is equal to  for all  over some interval containing a. To 

do this, we may need to try one or more of the following steps: 
a. If  and  are polynomials, we should factor each function and cancel out any common factors. 
b. If the numerator or denominator contains a difference involving a square root, we should try multiplying the 

numerator and denominator by the conjugate of the expression involving the square root. 
c. If  is a complex fraction, we begin by simplifying it. 

3. Last, we apply the limit laws. 

The next examples demonstrate the use of this Problem-Solving Strategy. Example 2.17 illustrates the factor-and-cancel 
technique; Example 2.18 shows multiplying by a conjugate. In Example 2.19, we look at simplifying a complex fraction. 

EXAMPLE 2.17 

Evaluating a Limit by Factoring and Canceling 
Evaluate 

Solution 
Step 1. The function  is undefined for  In fact, if we substitute 3 into the function we get 
which is indeterminate. Factoring and canceling is a good strategy: 

Step 2. For all  Therefore, 

Step 3. Evaluate using the limit laws: 

 2.13 Evaluate 

Access for free at openstax.org



2.3 • The Limit Laws     145

EXAMPLE 2.18 

Evaluating a Limit by Multiplying by a Conjugate 
Evaluate 

Solution 
Step 1.  has the form  at −1. Let’s begin by multiplying by  the conjugate of  on the 
numerator and denominator: 

Step 2. We then multiply out the numerator. We don’t multiply out the denominator because we are hoping that the 
 in the denominator cancels out in the end: 

Step 3. Then we cancel: 

Step 4. Last, we apply the limit laws: 

 2.14 Evaluate 

EXAMPLE 2.19 

Evaluating a Limit by Simplifying a Complex Fraction 

Evaluate 

Solution 

Step 1.  has the form  at 1. We simplify the algebraic fraction by multiplying by 

Step 2. Next, we multiply through the numerators. Do not multiply the denominators because we want to be able to 
cancel the factor 

Step 3. Then, we simplify the numerator: 

Step 4. Now we factor out −1 from the numerator: 



146     2 • Limits

Step 5. Then, we cancel the common factors of 

Step 6. Last, we evaluate using the limit laws: 

 2.15 Evaluate 

Example 2.20 does not fall neatly into any of the patterns established in the previous examples. However, with a little 
creativity, we can still use these same techniques. 

EXAMPLE 2.20 

Evaluating a Limit When the Limit Laws Do Not Apply 
Evaluate 

Solution 
Both  and  fail to have a limit at zero. Since neither of the two functions has a limit at zero, we cannot apply 
the sum law for limits; we must use a different strategy. In this case, we find the limit by performing addition and then 
applying one of our previous strategies. Observe that 

Thus, 

 2.16 Evaluate 

Let’s now revisit one-sided limits. Simple modifications in the limit laws allow us to apply them to one-sided limits. For 
example, to apply the limit laws to a limit of the form  we require the function  to be defined over an 

open interval of the form  for a limit of the form  we require the function  to be defined over an 

open interval of the form  Example 2.21 illustrates this point. 

EXAMPLE 2.21 

Evaluating a One-Sided Limit Using the Limit Laws 
Evaluate each of the following limits, if possible. 

a. 

b. 

Access for free at openstax.org



2.3 • The Limit Laws     147

Solution 
Figure 2.25 illustrates the function  and aids in our understanding of these limits. 

Figure 2.25 The graph shows the function 

a. The function  is defined over the interval ∞  Since this function is not defined to the left of 3, 
we cannot apply the limit laws to compute  In fact, since  is undefined to the left of 3, 

 does not exist. 

b. Since  is defined to the right of 3, the limit laws do apply to  By applying these limit 

laws we obtain 

In Example 2.22 we look at one-sided limits of a piecewise-defined function and use these limits to draw a conclusion 
about a two-sided limit of the same function. 

EXAMPLE 2.22 

Evaluating a Two-Sided Limit Using the Limit Laws 

For  evaluate each of the following limits: 

a. 

b. 

c. 

Solution 
Figure 2.26 illustrates the function  and aids in our understanding of these limits. 

Figure 2.26 This graph shows a function 

a. Since  for all x in ∞  replace  in the limit with  and apply the limit laws: 



148     2 • Limits

b. Since  for all x in ∞  replace  in the limit with  and apply the limit laws: 

c. Since  and  we conclude that  does not exist. 

 2.17 Graph  and evaluate 

We now turn our attention to evaluating a limit of the form  where  where  and 
 That is,  has the form  at a. 

EXAMPLE 2.23 

Evaluating a Limit of the Form  Using the Limit Laws 
Evaluate 

Solution 
Step 1. After substituting in  we see that this limit has the form  That is, as x approaches 2 from the left, the 
numerator approaches −1; and the denominator approaches 0. Consequently, the magnitude of  becomes infinite. 
To get a better idea of what the limit is, we need to factor the denominator: 

Step 2. Since  is the only part of the denominator that is zero when 2 is substituted, we then separate 
from the rest of the function: 

Step 3.  and ∞  Therefore, the product of  and  has a limit of 

∞

 2.18 Evaluate 

The Squeeze Theorem 
The techniques we have developed thus far work very well for algebraic functions, but we are still unable to evaluate 
limits of very basic trigonometric functions. The next theorem, called the squeeze theorem, proves very useful for 
establishing basic trigonometric limits. This theorem allows us to calculate limits by “squeezing” a function, with a limit at 
a point a that is unknown, between two functions having a common known limit at a. Figure 2.27 illustrates this idea. 

Access for free at openstax.org



2.3 • The Limit Laws     149

Figure 2.27 The Squeeze Theorem applies when  and 

Theorem 2.7 

The Squeeze Theorem 
Let  and  be defined for all  over an open interval containing a. If 

for all  in an open interval containing a and 

where L is a real number, then 

EXAMPLE 2.24 

Applying the Squeeze Theorem 
Apply the squeeze theorem to evaluate 

Solution 
Because  for all x, we have . Since  from the squeeze 
theorem, we obtain  The graphs of  and  are shown in Figure 2.28. 



150     2 • Limits

Figure 2.28 The graphs of  and  are shown around the point 

 2.19 Use the squeeze theorem to evaluate 

We now use the squeeze theorem to tackle several very important limits. Although this discussion is somewhat lengthy, 
these limits prove invaluable for the development of the material in both the next section and the next chapter. The first 
of these limits is  Consider the unit circle shown in Figure 2.29. In the figure, we see that  is the y-coordinate 
on the unit circle and it corresponds to the line segment shown in blue. The radian measure of angle θ is the length of 
the arc it subtends on the unit circle. Therefore, we see that for 

Figure 2.29 The sine function is shown as a line on the unit circle. 
Because  and  by using the squeeze theorem we conclude that 

To see that  as well, observe that for  and hence, 

Consequently,  It follows that  An application of the squeeze theorem produces the 
desired limit. Thus, since  and 

(2.16) 

Next, using the identity  for  we see that 

Access for free at openstax.org



2.3 • The Limit Laws     151

(2.17) 

We now take a look at a limit that plays an important role in later chapters—namely,  To evaluate this limit, we 
use the unit circle in Figure 2.30. Notice that this figure adds one additional triangle to Figure 2.30. We see that the 
length of the side opposite angle θ in this new triangle is  Thus, we see that for 

Figure 2.30 The sine and tangent functions are shown as lines on the unit circle. 
By dividing by  in all parts of the inequality, we obtain 

Equivalently, we have 

Since  we conclude that  By applying a manipulation similar to that used in 

demonstrating that  we can show that  Thus, 

(2.18) 

In Example 2.25 we use this limit to establish  This limit also proves useful in later chapters. 

EXAMPLE 2.25 

Evaluating an Important Trigonometric Limit 
Evaluate 

Solution 
In the first step, we multiply by the conjugate so that we can use a trigonometric identity to convert the cosine in the 
numerator to a sine: 



152     2 • Limits

Therefore, 

(2.19) 

 2.20 Evaluate 

STUDENT PROJECT 

Deriving the Formula for the Area of a Circle 
Some of the geometric formulas we take for granted today were first derived by methods that anticipate some of the 
methods of calculus. The Greek mathematician Archimedes (ca. 287−212; BCE) was particularly inventive, using 
polygons inscribed within circles to approximate the area of the circle as the number of sides of the polygon 
increased. He never came up with the idea of a limit, but we can use this idea to see what his geometric constructions 
could have predicted about the limit. 

We can estimate the area of a circle by computing the area of an inscribed regular polygon. Think of the regular 
polygon as being made up of n triangles. By taking the limit as the vertex angle of these triangles goes to zero, you 
can obtain the area of the circle. To see this, carry out the following steps: 

1. Express the height h and the base b of the isosceles triangle in Figure 2.31 in terms of  and r. 

Figure 2.31 

2. Using the expressions that you obtained in step 1, express the area of the isosceles triangle in terms of θ and r. 
(Substitute  for  in your expression.) 

3. If an n-sided regular polygon is inscribed in a circle of radius r, find a relationship between θ and n. Solve this for 
n. Keep in mind there are 2π radians in a circle. (Use radians, not degrees.) 

4. Find an expression for the area of the n-sided polygon in terms of r and θ. 
5. To find a formula for the area of the circle, find the limit of the expression in step 4 as θ goes to zero. (Hint: 

Access for free at openstax.org



2.3 • The Limit Laws     153

The technique of estimating areas of regions by using polygons is revisited in Introduction to Integration. 

 SECTION 2.3 EXERCISES 
In the following exercises, use the limit laws to evaluate each limit. Justify each step by indicating the appropriate limit 
law(s). 

83 .  84 .  85 . 

86 . 

In the following exercises, use direct substitution to evaluate each limit. 

87 .  88 .  89 . 

90 .  91 .  92 . 

In the following exercises, use direct substitution to show that each limit leads to the indeterminate form  Then, 
evaluate the limit. 

93 .  94 .  95 . 

96 .  97 .  98 .  where a is a 
non-zero real-valued 
constant 

99 .  100 .  101 . 

102. 

In the following exercises, use direct substitution to obtain an undefined expression. Then, use the method of Example 
2.23 to simplify the function to help determine the limit. 

103.  104 .  105 . 

106. 

In the following exercises, assume that  and  Use these three facts and the limit 

laws to evaluate each limit. 

107.  108 .  109 . 

110.  111 .  112 . 

113.  114 . 



154     2 • Limits

[T] In the following exercises, use a calculator to draw the graph of each piecewise-defined function and study the graph 
to evaluate the given limits. 

115.  116 .  117 . 

a. a. a. 

b. b. b. 

In the following exercises, use the following graphs and the limit laws to evaluate each limit. 

 118 . 

119.  120 .  121 . 

122.  123 .  124 . 

125. 

Access for free at openstax.org



2.4 • Continuity     155

For the following problems, evaluate the limit using the squeeze theorem. Use a calculator to graph the functions 
 and  when possible. 

126. [T] True or False? If  127 . [T]  128 .  where 

then 

129. [T] In physics, the  130 . [T] The density of an 
magnitude of an electric object is given by its mass 
field generated by a point divided by its volume: 
charge at a distance r in 
vacuum is governed by a. Use a calculator to plot 
Coulomb’s law: the volume as a 

 where E function of density 
 assuming 

represents the magnitude you are examining 
of the electric field, q is something of mass 8 
the charge of the particle, kg (
r is the distance between b. Evaluate 
the particle and where 
the strength of the field is and explain the 
measured, and  is physical meaning. 
Coulomb’s constant: 

a. Use a graphing 
calculator to graph 

 given that the 
charge of the particle 
is 

b. Evaluate 

What is the physical 
meaning of this 
quantity? Is it 
physically relevant? 
Why are you 
evaluating from the 
right? 

2.4 Continuity 
Learning Objectives 

2.4.1 Explain the three conditions for continuity at a point. 
2.4.2 Describe three kinds of discontinuities. 
2.4.3 Define continuity on an interval. 
2.4.4 State the theorem for limits of composite functions. 
2.4.5 Provide an example of the intermediate value theorem. 

Many functions have the property that their graphs can be traced with a pencil without lifting the pencil from the page. 
Such functions are called continuous. Other functions have points at which a break in the graph occurs, but satisfy this 
property over intervals contained in their domains. They are continuous on these intervals and are said to have a 
discontinuity at a point where a break occurs. 
We begin our investigation of continuity by exploring what it means for a function to have continuity at a point. 
Intuitively, a function is continuous at a particular point if there is no break in its graph at that point. 

Continuity at a Point 
Before we look at a formal definition of what it means for a function to be continuous at a point, let’s consider various 
functions that fail to meet our intuitive notion of what it means to be continuous at a point. We then create a list of 
conditions that prevent such failures. 



156     2 • Limits

Our first function of interest is shown in Figure 2.32. We see that the graph of  has a hole at a. In fact,  is 
undefined. At the very least, for  to be continuous at a, we need the following condition: 

Figure 2.32 The function  is not continuous at a because  is undefined. 
However, as we see in Figure 2.33, this condition alone is insufficient to guarantee continuity at the point a. Although 

 is defined, the function has a gap at a. In this example, the gap exists because  does not exist. We must 
add another condition for continuity at a—namely, 

Figure 2.33 The function  is not continuous at a because  does not exist. 

However, as we see in Figure 2.34, these two conditions by themselves do not guarantee continuity at a point. The 
function in this figure satisfies both of our first two conditions, but is still not continuous at a. We must add a third 
condition to our list: 

Figure 2.34 The function  is not continuous at a because 

Now we put our list of conditions together and form a definition of continuity at a point. 

Access for free at openstax.org



2.4 • Continuity     157

Definition 

A function  is continuous at a point a if and only if the following three conditions are satisfied: 

i.  is defined 
ii.  exists 
iii. 

A function is discontinuous at a point a if it fails to be continuous at a. 

The following procedure can be used to analyze the continuity of a function at a point using this definition. 

Problem-Solving Strategy 

Determining Continuity at a Point 
1. Check to see if  is defined. If  is undefined, we need go no further. The function is not continuous at a. If 

 is defined, continue to step 2. 
2. Compute  In some cases, we may need to do this by first computing  and  If 

 does not exist (that is, it is not a real number), then the function is not continuous at a and the problem 
is solved. If  exists, then continue to step 3. 

3. Compare  and  If  then the function is not continuous at a. If 
then the function is continuous at a. 

The next three examples demonstrate how to apply this definition to determine whether a function is continuous at a 
given point. These examples illustrate situations in which each of the conditions for continuity in the definition succeed 
or fail. 

EXAMPLE 2.26 

Determining Continuity at a Point, Condition 1 
Using the definition, determine whether the function  is continuous at  Justify the 
conclusion. 

Solution 
Let’s begin by trying to calculate  We can see that  which is undefined. Therefore,  is 
discontinuous at 2 because  is undefined. The graph of  is shown in Figure 2.35. 



158     2 • Limits

Figure 2.35 The function  is discontinuous at 2 because  is undefined. 

EXAMPLE 2.27 

Determining Continuity at a Point, Condition 2 

Using the definition, determine whether the function  is continuous at  Justify the 

conclusion. 

Solution 
Let’s begin by trying to calculate 

Thus,  is defined. Next, we calculate  To do this, we must compute  and 

and 

Therefore,  does not exist. Thus,  is not continuous at 3. The graph of  is shown in Figure 2.36. 

Access for free at openstax.org



2.4 • Continuity     159

Figure 2.36 The function  is not continuous at 3 because  does not exist. 

EXAMPLE 2.28 

Determining Continuity at a Point, Condition 3 

Using the definition, determine whether the function  is continuous at 

Solution 
First, observe that 

Next, 

Last, compare  and  We see that 

Since all three of the conditions in the definition of continuity are satisfied,  is continuous at 

 2.21 Using the definition, determine whether the function  is continuous at  If 

the function is not continuous at 1, indicate the condition for continuity at a point that fails to hold. 

By applying the definition of continuity and previously established theorems concerning the evaluation of limits, we can 
state the following theorem. 



160     2 • Limits

Theorem 2.8 

Continuity of Polynomials and Rational Functions 
Polynomials and rational functions are continuous at every point in their domains. 

Proof 
Previously, we showed that if  and  are polynomials,  for every polynomial  and 

 as long as  Therefore, polynomials and rational functions are continuous on their domains. 

□ 
We now apply Continuity of Polynomials and Rational Functions to determine the points at which a given rational 
function is continuous. 

EXAMPLE 2.29 

Continuity of a Rational Function 
For what values of x is  continuous? 

Solution 
The rational function  is continuous for every value of x except 

 2.22 For what values of x is  continuous? 

Types of Discontinuities 
As we have seen in Example 2.26 and Example 2.27, discontinuities take on several different appearances. We classify the 
types of discontinuities we have seen thus far as removable discontinuities, infinite discontinuities, or jump 
discontinuities. Intuitively, a removable discontinuity is a discontinuity for which there is a hole in the graph, a jump 
discontinuity is a noninfinite discontinuity for which the sections of the function do not meet up, and an infinite 
discontinuity is a discontinuity located at a vertical asymptote. Figure 2.37 illustrates the differences in these types of 
discontinuities. Although these terms provide a handy way of describing three common types of discontinuities, keep in 
mind that not all discontinuities fit neatly into these categories. 

Figure 2.37 Discontinuities are classified as (a) removable, (b) jump, or (c) infinite. 
These three discontinuities are formally defined as follows: 

Definition 

If  is discontinuous at a, then 

Access for free at openstax.org



2.4 • Continuity     161

1.  has a removable discontinuity at a if  exists. (Note: When we state that  exists, we mean that 
 where L is a real number.) 

2.  has a jump discontinuity at a if  and  both exist, but  (Note: 

When we state that  and  both exist, we mean that both are real-valued and that neither 

take on the values ±∞.) 
3.  has an infinite discontinuity at a if ∞  and/or ∞

EXAMPLE 2.30 

Classifying a Discontinuity 
In Example 2.26, we showed that  is discontinuous at  Classify this discontinuity as removable, jump, 
or infinite. 

Solution 
To classify the discontinuity at 2 we must evaluate 

Since f is discontinuous at 2 and  exists, f has a removable discontinuity at 

EXAMPLE 2.31 

Classifying a Discontinuity 

In Example 2.27, we showed that  is discontinuous at  Classify this discontinuity as 

removable, jump, or infinite. 

Solution 
Earlier, we showed that f is discontinuous at 3 because  does not exist. However, since  and 

 both exist, we conclude that the function has a jump discontinuity at 3. 

EXAMPLE 2.32 

Classifying a Discontinuity 
Determine whether  is continuous at −1. If the function is discontinuous at −1, classify the discontinuity as 
removable, jump, or infinite. 

Solution 
The function value  is undefined. Therefore, the function is not continuous at −1. To determine the type of 
discontinuity, we must determine the limit at −1. We see that ∞  and ∞  Therefore, the 

function has an infinite discontinuity at −1. 



162     2 • Limits

 2.23 For  decide whether f is continuous at 1. If f is not continuous at 1, classify the 

discontinuity as removable, jump, or infinite. 

Continuity over an Interval 
Now that we have explored the concept of continuity at a point, we extend that idea to continuity over an interval. As 
we develop this idea for different types of intervals, it may be useful to keep in mind the intuitive idea that a function is 
continuous over an interval if we can use a pencil to trace the function between any two points in the interval without 
lifting the pencil from the paper. In preparation for defining continuity on an interval, we begin by looking at the 
definition of what it means for a function to be continuous from the right at a point and continuous from the left at a 
point. 

Continuity from the Right and from the Left 

A function  is said to be continuous from the right at a if 

A function  is said to be continuous from the left at a if 

A function is continuous over an open interval if it is continuous at every point in the interval. A function  is 
continuous over a closed interval of the form  if it is continuous at every point in  and is continuous from the 
right at a and is continuous from the left at b. Analogously, a function  is continuous over an interval of the form 

 if it is continuous over  and is continuous from the left at b. Continuity over other types of intervals are 
defined in a similar fashion. 
Requiring that  and  ensures that we can trace the graph of the function from the 

point  to the point  without lifting the pencil. If, for example,  we would need to lift 

our pencil to jump from  to the graph of the rest of the function over 

EXAMPLE 2.33 

Continuity on an Interval 
State the interval(s) over which the function  is continuous. 

Solution 
Since  is a rational function, it is continuous at every point in its domain. The domain of  is the set 

∞ ∞  Thus,  is continuous over each of the intervals ∞  and ∞

EXAMPLE 2.34 

Continuity over an Interval 
State the interval(s) over which the function  is continuous. 

Solution 
From the limit laws, we know that  for all values of a in  We also know that 

 exists and  exists. Therefore,  is continuous over the interval 

 2.24 State the interval(s) over which the function  is continuous. 

The Composite Function Theorem allows us to expand our ability to compute limits. In particular, this theorem ultimately 

Access for free at openstax.org



2.4 • Continuity     163

allows us to demonstrate that trigonometric functions are continuous over their domains. 

Theorem 2.9 

Composite Function Theorem 
If  is continuous at L and  then 

Before we move on to Example 2.35, recall that earlier, in the section on limit laws, we showed 
Consequently, we know that  is continuous at 0. In Example 2.35 we see how to combine this result with the 
composite function theorem. 

EXAMPLE 2.35 

Limit of a Composite Cosine Function 
Evaluate 

Solution 
The given function is a composite of  and  Since  and  is continuous at 0, we may 
apply the composite function theorem. Thus, 

 2.25 Evaluate 

The proof of the next theorem uses the composite function theorem as well as the continuity of  and 
 at the point 0 to show that trigonometric functions are continuous over their entire domains. 

Theorem 2.10 

Continuity of Trigonometric Functions 
Trigonometric functions are continuous over their entire domains. 

Proof 
We begin by demonstrating that  is continuous at every real number. To do this, we must show that 
for all values of a. 

The proof that  is continuous at every real number is analogous. Because the remaining trigonometric functions 
may be expressed in terms of  and  their continuity follows from the quotient limit law. 
□ 
As you can see, the composite function theorem is invaluable in demonstrating the continuity of trigonometric functions. 



164     2 • Limits

As we continue our study of calculus, we revisit this theorem many times. 

The Intermediate Value Theorem 
Functions that are continuous over intervals of the form  where a and b are real numbers, exhibit many useful 
properties. Throughout our study of calculus, we will encounter many powerful theorems concerning such functions. 
The first of these theorems is the Intermediate Value Theorem. 

Theorem 2.11 

The Intermediate Value Theorem 
Let f be continuous over a closed, bounded interval  If z is any real number between  and  then there 
is a number c in  satisfying  in Figure 2.38. 

Figure 2.38 There is a number  that satisfies 

EXAMPLE 2.36 

Application of the Intermediate Value Theorem 
Show that  has at least one zero. 

Solution 
Since  is continuous over ∞ ∞  it is continuous over any closed interval of the form  If you 
can find an interval  such that  and  have opposite signs, you can use the Intermediate Value Theorem to 
conclude there must be a real number c in  that satisfies  Note that 

and 

Using the Intermediate Value Theorem, we can see that there must be a real number c in  that satisfies 
Therefore,  has at least one zero. 

EXAMPLE 2.37 

When Can You Apply the Intermediate Value Theorem? 
If  is continuous over  and  can we use the Intermediate Value Theorem to conclude that 

 has no zeros in the interval  Explain. 

Access for free at openstax.org



2.4 • Continuity     165

Solution 
No. The Intermediate Value Theorem only allows us to conclude that we can find a value between  and  it 
doesn’t allow us to conclude that we can’t find other values. To see this more clearly, consider the function 

 It satisfies  and 

EXAMPLE 2.38 

When Can You Apply the Intermediate Value Theorem? 
For  and  Can we conclude that  has a zero in the interval 

Solution 
No. The function is not continuous over  The Intermediate Value Theorem does not apply here. 

 2.26 Show that  has a zero over the interval 

 SECTION 2.4 EXERCISES 
For the following exercises, determine the point(s), if any, at which each function is discontinuous. Classify any 
discontinuity as jump, removable, infinite, or other. 

131.  132 .  133 . 

134.  135 .  136 . 

137.  138 . 

For the following exercises, decide if the function continuous at the given point. If it is discontinuous, what type of 
discontinuity is it? 

139.  at  140 .  at  141 . 

at 

142.  at  143 .  144 . 

at at 

In the following exercises, find the value(s) of k that makes each function continuous over the given interval. 

145.  146 . 

147.  148 .  149 . 



166     2 • Limits

In the following exercises, use the Intermediate Value Theorem (IVT). 
150. Let  151 . A particle moving along a  152 . [T] Use the statement 

line has at each time t a “The cosine of t is equal to 
position function t cubed.” 

Over the interval which is continuous. a. Write a mathematical 
there is no value of x such Assume  and equation of the 
that  although  Another particle statement. 

 and moves such that its b. Prove that the 
Explain why this does not position is given by equation in part a. has 
contradict the IVT.  Explain at least one real 

why there must be a solution. 
value c for  such c. Use a calculator to find 
that an interval of length 

0.01 that contains a 
solution. 

153. Apply the IVT to  154 . Consider the graph of the  155 . Let 
determine whether function  shown in the 

 has a solution in following graph. a. Sketch the graph of f. 
one of the intervals b. Is it possible to find a 

 or value k such that 
 Briefly  which 

explain your response for makes 
each interval. continuous for all real 

numbers? Briefly 
explain. 

a. Find all values for which the 
function is discontinuous. 

b. For each value in part a., 
state why the formal 
definition of continuity does 
not apply. 

c. Classify each discontinuity as 
either jump, removable, or 
infinite. 

Access for free at openstax.org



2.4 • Continuity     167

156. Let  for  157 . Sketch the graph of a function  158 . Sketch the graph of a 
 with properties i. function  with 

a. Sketch the graph of f. through vi. properties i. through iv. 
b. Is it possible to find i. The domain of f is i. The domain of f is 

values  and  such ∞ ∞
that  and ii.  and 

ii. f has an infinite discontinuity 
 and that at  exist and 

makes iii. 
continuous for all real iv. are equal. 
numbers? Briefly iii.  is left continuous 
explain. v. but not continuous at 

vi. f is left continuous but not  and right 
right continuous at continuous but not 

continuous at 
iv.  has a removable 

discontinuity at 
a jump discontinuity at 

 and the 
following limits hold: 

∞  and 

In the following exercises, suppose  is defined for all x. For each description, sketch a graph with the indicated 
property. 
159. Discontinuous at  160 . Discontinuous at 

with  and but continuous elsewhere 
with 

Determine whether each of the given statements is true. Justify your response with an explanation or counterexample. 

161.  is  162 . If the left- and right-hand  163 . If a function is not 
continuous everywhere. limits of  as continuous at a point, 

exist and are equal, then f then it is not defined at 
cannot be discontinuous that point. 
at 

164. According to the IVT,  165 . If  is continuous such  166 . The function 
 has that  and  have  is 

a solution over the opposite signs, then 
interval  has exactly one continuous over the 

solution in interval 

167. If  is continuous 
everywhere and 

 then 
there is no root of  in 
the interval 



168     2 • Limits

[T] The following problems consider the scalar form of Coulomb’s law, which describes the electrostatic force between 
two point charges, such as electrons. It is given by the equation  where  is Coulomb’s constant,  are 
the magnitudes of the charges of the two particles, and r is the distance between the two particles. 
168. To simplify the calculation of a  169 . Instead of making the force 

model with many interacting 0 at R, instead we let the 
particles, after some threshold force be 10−20 for 
value  we approximate F as Assume two protons, which 
zero. have a magnitude of 
a. Explain the physical reasoning charge 

behind this assumption. and the Coulomb constant 
b. What is the force equation? 
c. Evaluate the force F using both Is there a value R that can 

Coulomb’s law and our make this system 
approximation, assuming two continuous? If so, find it. 
protons with a charge 
magnitude of 

and the Coulomb constant 
 are 

1 m apart. Also, assume 
 How much 

inaccuracy does our 
approximation generate? Is 
our approximation 
reasonable? 

d. Is there any finite value of R 
for which this system remains 
continuous at R? 

Recall the discussion on spacecraft from the chapter opener. The following problems consider a rocket launch from 
Earth’s surface. The force of gravity on the rocket is given by  where m is the mass of the rocket, d is the 
distance of the rocket from the center of Earth, and k is a constant. 
170. [T] Determine the value  171 . [T] After a certain distance D  172 . As the rocket travels away 

and units of k given that has passed, the gravitational from Earth’s surface, 
the mass of the rocket is 3 effect of Earth becomes there is a distance D 
million kg. (Hint: The quite negligible, so we can where the rocket sheds 
distance from the center approximate the force some of its mass, since it 
of Earth to its surface is function by no longer needs the 
6378 km.) excess fuel storage. We 

can write this function as 

Using the value of k found in 
the previous exercise, find 
the necessary condition D 
such that the force function Is there a D value such 
remains continuous. that this function is 

continuous, assuming 

Prove the following functions are continuous everywhere 
173.  174 .  175 . Where is 

continuous? 

Access for free at openstax.org



2.5 • The Precise Definition of a Limit     169

2.5 The Precise Definition of a Limit 
Learning Objectives 

2.5.1 Describe the epsilon-delta definition of a limit. 
2.5.2 Apply the epsilon-delta definition to find the limit of a function. 
2.5.3 Describe the epsilon-delta definitions of one-sided limits and infinite limits. 
2.5.4 Use the epsilon-delta definition to prove the limit laws. 

By now you have progressed from the very informal definition of a limit in the introduction of this chapter to the intuitive 
understanding of a limit. At this point, you should have a very strong intuitive sense of what the limit of a function 
means and how you can find it. In this section, we convert this intuitive idea of a limit into a formal definition using 
precise mathematical language. The formal definition of a limit is quite possibly one of the most challenging definitions 
you will encounter early in your study of calculus; however, it is well worth any effort you make to reconcile it with your 
intuitive notion of a limit. Understanding this definition is the key that opens the door to a better understanding of 
calculus. 

Quantifying Closeness 
Before stating the formal definition of a limit, we must introduce a few preliminary ideas. Recall that the distance 
between two points a and b on a number line is given by 

• The statement  may be interpreted as: The distance between  and L is less than ε. 
• The statement  may be interpreted as:  and the distance between x and a is less than δ. 

It is also important to look at the following equivalences for absolute value: 
• The statement  is equivalent to the statement 
• The statement  is equivalent to the statement  and 

With these clarifications, we can state the formal epsilon-delta definition of the limit. 

Definition 

Let  be defined for all  over an open interval containing a. Let L be a real number. Then 

if, for every  there exists a  such that if  then 

This definition may seem rather complex from a mathematical point of view, but it becomes easier to understand if we 
break it down phrase by phrase. The statement itself involves something called a universal quantifier (for every 
an existential quantifier (there exists a  and, last, a conditional statement (if  then 

 Let’s take a look at Table 2.9, which breaks down the definition and translates each part. 

Definition Translation 

1. For every 1. For every positive distance ε from L, 

2. there exists a 2. There is a positive distance  from a, 

3. such that 3. such that 

4. if  then 4. if x is closer than  to a and  then  is closer than ε to L. 

Table 2.9 Translation of the Epsilon-Delta Definition of the Limit 

We can get a better handle on this definition by looking at the definition geometrically. Figure 2.39 shows possible values 
of  for various choices of  for a given function  a number a, and a limit L at a. Notice that as we choose 
smaller values of ε (the distance between the function and the limit), we can always find a  small enough so that if we 
have chosen an x value within  of a, then the value of  is within ε of the limit L. 



170     2 • Limits

Figure 2.39 These graphs show possible values of , given successively smaller choices of ε. 

 MEDIA 

Visit the following applet to experiment with finding values of  for selected values of ε: 

The epsilon-delta definition of limit (http://www.openstax.org/l/20_epsilondelt) 

Example 2.39 shows how you can use this definition to prove a statement about the limit of a specific function at a 
specified value. 

EXAMPLE 2.39 

Proving a Statement about the Limit of a Specific Function 
Prove that 

Solution 
Let 
The first part of the definition begins “For every  This means we must prove that whatever follows is true no 
matter what positive value of ε is chosen. By stating “Let  we signal our intent to do so. 
Choose 

The definition continues with “there exists a ” The phrase “there exists” in a mathematical statement is always a 
signal for a scavenger hunt. In other words, we must go and find  So, where exactly did  come from? There are 
two basic approaches to tracking down  One method is purely algebraic and the other is geometric. 
We begin by tackling the problem from an algebraic point of view. Since ultimately we want  we begin 
by manipulating this expression:  is equivalent to  which in turn is equivalent to 

 Last, this is equivalent to  Thus, it would seem that  is appropriate. 
We may also find  through geometric methods. Figure 2.40 demonstrates how this is done. 

Access for free at openstax.org



2.5 • The Precise Definition of a Limit     171

Figure 2.40 This graph shows how we find  geometrically. 
Assume  When  has been chosen, our goal is to show that if  then  To 
prove any statement of the form “If this, then that,” we begin by assuming “this” and trying to get “that.” 
Thus, 

Analysis 
In this part of the proof, we started with  and used our assumption  in a key part of the 
chain of inequalities to get  to be less than ε. We could just as easily have manipulated the assumed 
inequality  to arrive at  as follows: 

Therefore,  (Having completed the proof, we state what we have accomplished.) 

After removing all the remarks, here is a final version of the proof: 
Let 
Choose 
Assume 
Thus, 



172     2 • Limits

Therefore, 

The following Problem-Solving Strategy summarizes the type of proof we worked out in Example 2.39. 

Problem-Solving Strategy 

Proving That  for a Specific Function 

1. Let’s begin the proof with the following statement: Let 
2. Next, we need to obtain a value for  After we have obtained this value, we make the following statement, filling 

in the blank with our choice of : Choose 
3. The next statement in the proof should be (at this point, we fill in our given value for a): 

Assume 
4. Next, based on this assumption, we need to show that  where  and L are our function 

and our limit L. At some point, we need to use 
5. We conclude our proof with the statement: Therefore, 

EXAMPLE 2.40 

Proving a Statement about a Limit 
Complete the proof that  by filling in the blanks. 

Let _____. 
Choose 
Assume 
Thus, 

Solution 
We begin by filling in the blanks where the choices are specified by the definition. Thus, we have 
Let 
Choose 
Assume  (or equivalently, 
Thus, 
Focusing on the final line of the proof, we see that we should choose 

We now complete the final write-up of the proof: 
Let 
Choose 

Assume  (or equivalently, 

Access for free at openstax.org



2.5 • The Precise Definition of a Limit     173

Thus, 

 2.27 Complete the proof that  by filling in the blanks. 

Let _______. 

Choose 

Assume 

Thus, 

Therefore, 

In Example 2.39 and Example 2.40, the proofs were fairly straightforward, since the functions with which we were 
working were linear. In Example 2.41, we see how to modify the proof to accommodate a nonlinear function. 

EXAMPLE 2.41 

Proving a Statement about the Limit of a Specific Function (Geometric Approach) 
Prove that 

Solution 
1. Let  The first part of the definition begins “For every  so we must prove that whatever follows is true no 

matter what positive value of ε is chosen. By stating “Let  we signal our intent to do so. 
2. Without loss of generality, assume  Two questions present themselves: Why do we want  and why is it 

okay to make this assumption? In answer to the first question: Later on, in the process of solving for  we will 
discover that  involves the quantity  Consequently, we need  In answer to the second question: If we 
can find  that “works” for  then it will “work” for any  as well. Keep in mind that, although it is always 
okay to put an upper bound on ε, it is never okay to put a lower bound (other than zero) on ε. 

3. Choose  Figure 2.41 shows how we made this choice of 

Figure 2.41 This graph shows how we find δ geometrically for a given ε for the proof in Example 2.41. 

4. We must show: If  then  so we must begin by assuming 

We don’t really need  (in other words,  for this proof. Since  it is 
okay to drop 



174     2 • Limits

Hence, 

Recall that  Thus,  and consequently 
We also use  here. We might ask at this point: Why did we substitute  for  on the left-
hand side of the inequality and  on the right-hand side of the inequality? If we look at Figure 2.41, we see 
that  corresponds to the distance on the left of 2 on the x-axis and  corresponds to the 
distance on the right. Thus, 

We simplify the expression on the left: 

Then, we add 2 to all parts of the inequality: 

We square all parts of the inequality. It is okay to do so, since all parts of the inequality are positive: 

We subtract 4 from all parts of the inequality: 

Last, 

5. Therefore, 

 2.28 Find δ corresponding to  for a proof that 

The geometric approach to proving that the limit of a function takes on a specific value works quite well for some 
functions. Also, the insight into the formal definition of the limit that this method provides is invaluable. However, we 
may also approach limit proofs from a purely algebraic point of view. In many cases, an algebraic approach may not only 
provide us with additional insight into the definition, it may prove to be simpler as well. Furthermore, an algebraic 
approach is the primary tool used in proofs of statements about limits. For Example 2.42, we take on a purely algebraic 
approach. 

EXAMPLE 2.42 

Proving a Statement about the Limit of a Specific Function (Algebraic Approach) 
Prove that 

Solution 
Let’s use our outline from the Problem-Solving Strategy: 
1. Let 
2. Choose  This choice of  may appear odd at first glance, but it was obtained by taking a look at our 

ultimate desired inequality:  This inequality is equivalent to  At this 
point, the temptation simply to choose  is very strong. Unfortunately, our choice of  must depend on ε only 
and no other variable. If we can replace  by a numerical value, our problem can be resolved. This is the place 

Access for free at openstax.org



2.5 • The Precise Definition of a Limit     175

where assuming  comes into play. The choice of  here is arbitrary. We could have just as easily used any 
other positive number. In some proofs, greater care in this choice may be necessary. Now, since  and 

 we are able to show that  Consequently,  At this point we 
realize that we also need  Thus, we choose 

3. Assume  Thus, 

Since  we may conclude that  Thus, by subtracting 4 from all parts of the inequality, we 
obtain  Consequently,  This gives us 

Therefore, 

 2.29 Complete the proof that 

Let  choose  assume 

Since  we may conclude that  Thus,  Hence, 

You will find that, in general, the more complex a function, the more likely it is that the algebraic approach is the easiest 
to apply. The algebraic approach is also more useful in proving statements about limits. 

Proving Limit Laws 
We now demonstrate how to use the epsilon-delta definition of a limit to construct a rigorous proof of one of the limit 
laws. The triangle inequality is used at a key point of the proof, so we first review this key property of absolute value. 

Definition 

The triangle inequality states that if a and b are any real numbers, then 

Proof 
We prove the following limit law: If  and  then 

Let 
Choose  so that if  then 
Choose  so that if  then 
Choose 
Assume 
Thus, 

Hence, 

□ 
We now explore what it means for a limit not to exist. The limit  does not exist if there is no real number L for 



176     2 • Limits

which  Thus, for all real numbers L,  To understand what this means, we look at each part of 
the definition of  together with its opposite. A translation of the definition is given in Table 2.10. 

Definition Opposite 

1. For every 1. There exists  so that 

2. there exists a  so that 2. for every 

3. if  then 3. There is an x satisfying  so that 

Table 2.10 Translation of the Definition of  and its Opposite 

Finally, we may state what it means for a limit not to exist. The limit  does not exist if for every real number L, 
there exists a real number  so that for all  there is an x satisfying  so that 
Let’s apply this in Example 2.43 to show that a limit does not exist. 

EXAMPLE 2.43 

Showing That a Limit Does Not Exist 
Show that  does not exist. The graph of  is shown here: 

Solution 
Suppose that L is a candidate for a limit. Choose 
Let  Either  or  If  then let  Thus, 

and 

On the other hand, if  then let  Thus, 

and 

Access for free at openstax.org



2.5 • The Precise Definition of a Limit     177

Thus, for any value of L, 

One-Sided and Infinite Limits 
Just as we first gained an intuitive understanding of limits and then moved on to a more rigorous definition of a limit, we 
now revisit one-sided limits. To do this, we modify the epsilon-delta definition of a limit to give formal epsilon-delta 
definitions for limits from the right and left at a point. These definitions only require slight modifications from the 
definition of the limit. In the definition of the limit from the right, the inequality  replaces 
which ensures that we only consider values of x that are greater than (to the right of) a. Similarly, in the definition of the 
limit from the left, the inequality  replaces  which ensures that we only consider values of 
x that are less than (to the left of) a. 

Definition 

Limit from the Right: Let  be defined over an open interval of the form  where  Then, 

if for every  there exists a  such that if  then 

Limit from the Left: Let  be defined over an open interval of the form  where  Then, 

if for every  there exists a  such that if  then 

EXAMPLE 2.44 

Proving a Statement about a Limit From the Right 
Prove that 

Solution 
Let 

Choose  Since we ultimately want  we manipulate this inequality to get  or, 
equivalently,  making  a clear choice. We may also determine  geometrically, as shown in Figure 
2.42. 

Figure 2.42 This graph shows how we find δ for the proof in Example 2.44. 



178     2 • Limits

Assume  Thus,  Hence,  Finally, 

Therefore, 

 2.30 Find  corresponding to ε for a proof that 

We conclude the process of converting our intuitive ideas of various types of limits to rigorous formal definitions by 
pursuing a formal definition of infinite limits. To have ∞  we want the values of the function  to get 
larger and larger as x approaches a. Instead of the requirement that  for arbitrarily small ε when 

 for small enough  we want  for arbitrarily large positive M when  for small 
enough  Figure 2.43 illustrates this idea by showing the value of  for successively larger values of M. 

Figure 2.43 These graphs plot values of  for M to show that ∞

Definition 

Let  be defined for all  in an open interval containing a. Then, we have an infinite limit 

∞

if for every  there exists  such that if  then 

Let  be defined for all  in an open interval containing a. Then, we have a negative infinite limit 

∞

if for every  there exists  such that if  then 

 SECTION 2.5 EXERCISES 
In the following exercises, write the appropriate -  definition for each of the given statements. 
176.  177 .  178 . 

179. 

Access for free at openstax.org



2.5 • The Precise Definition of a Limit     179

The following graph of the function f satisfies  In the following exercises, determine a value of  that 
satisfies each statement. 

 180 . If  then 

181. If  then 

The following graph of the function f satisfies  In the following exercises, determine a value of  that 
satisfies each statement. 

 182 . If  then 

183. If  then 



180     2 • Limits

The following graph of the function f satisfies  In the following exercises, for each value of ε, find a value of 
 such that the precise definition of limit holds true. 

 184 . 
185. 

[T] In the following exercises, use a graphing calculator to find a number  such that the statements hold true. 

186.  187 . 
whenever 

In the following exercises, use the precise definition of limit to prove the given limits. 

188.  189 .  190 . 

191.  192 . 

In the following exercises, use the precise definition of limit to prove the given one-sided limits. 

193.  194 . 

195. 

In the following exercises, use the precise definition of limit to prove the given infinite limits. 

196. ∞  197 . ∞  198 . ∞

199. An engineer is using a  200 . Use the precise definition  201 . Using precise definitions 
machine to cut a flat of limit to prove that the of limits, prove that 
square of Aerogel of area following limit does not  does not exist, 
144 cm2. If there is a exist: 
maximum error tolerance given that  is the 
in the area of 8 cm2, how ceiling function. (Hint: Try 
accurately must the any 
engineer cut on the side, 
assuming all sides have 
the same length? How do 
these numbers relate to 

 ε, a, and L? 

Access for free at openstax.org



2.5 • The Precise Definition of a Limit     181

202. Using precise definitions of  203 . Using precise definitions of  204 . Using the function from 
limits, prove that limits, determine the previous exercise, use 
does not exist: for the precise definition of 

limits to show that 
 does not exist 

(Hint: Think about how you (Hint: Break into two cases, for 
can always choose a rational x rational and x irrational.) 
number  but 

For the following exercises, suppose that  and  both exist. Use the precise definition of limits 
to prove the following limit laws: 
205.  206 .  for any 

real constant c (Hint: 
Consider two cases: 
and 

207.  (Hint: 



182     2 • Chapter Review

Chapter Review 
Key Terms 
average velocity  the change in an object’s position divided by the length of a time period; the average velocity of an 

object over a time interval  (if  or  if , with a position given by  that is 
constant multiple law for limits  the limit law 
continuity at a point  A function  is continuous at a point a if and only if the following three conditions are 

satisfied: (1)  is defined, (2)  exists, and (3) 
continuity from the left  A function is continuous from the left at b if 

continuity from the right  A function is continuous from the right at a if 

continuity over an interval  a function that can be traced with a pencil without lifting the pencil; a function is 
continuous over an open interval if it is continuous at every point in the interval; a function  is continuous over a 
closed interval of the form  if it is continuous at every point in  and it is continuous from the right at a and 
from the left at b 

difference law for limits  the limit law 
differential calculus  the field of calculus concerned with the study of derivatives and their applications 
discontinuity at a point  A function is discontinuous at a point or has a discontinuity at a point if it is not continuous at 

the point 
epsilon-delta definition of the limit   if for every  there exists a  such that if 

then 
infinite discontinuity  An infinite discontinuity occurs at a point a if ∞  or ∞
infinite limit  A function has an infinite limit at a point a if it either increases or decreases without bound as it 

approaches a 
instantaneous velocity  The instantaneous velocity of an object with a position function that is given by  is the 

value that the average velocities on intervals of the form  and  approach as the values of t move closer to 
provided such a value exists 

integral calculus  the study of integrals and their applications 
Intermediate Value Theorem  Let f be continuous over a closed bounded interval  if z is any real number 

between  and  then there is a number c in  satisfying 
intuitive definition of the limit  If all values of the function  approach the real number L as the values of 

approach a,  approaches L 
jump discontinuity  A jump discontinuity occurs at a point a if  and  both exist, but 

limit  the process of letting x or t approach a in an expression; the limit of a function  as x approaches a is the 
value that  approaches as x approaches a 

limit laws  the individual properties of limits; for each of the individual laws, let  and  be defined for all 
over some open interval containing a; assume that L and M are real numbers so that  and 

 let c be a constant 
multivariable calculus  the study of the calculus of functions of two or more variables 
one-sided limit  A one-sided limit of a function is a limit taken from either the left or the right 
power law for limits  the limit law  for every positive integer n 
product law for limits  the limit law 

quotient law for limits  the limit law  for 

removable discontinuity  A removable discontinuity occurs at a point a if  is discontinuous at a, but 
exists 

root law for limits  the limit law  for all L if n is odd and for  if n is even 

secant  A secant line to a function  at a is a line through the point  and another point on the function; the 
slope of the secant line is given by 

Access for free at openstax.org



2 • Chapter Review     183

squeeze theorem  states that if  for all  over an open interval containing a and 
 where L is a real number, then 

sum law for limits  The limit law 
tangent  A tangent line to the graph of a function at a point  is the line that secant lines through 

approach as they are taken through points on the function with x-values that approach a; the slope of the tangent 
line to a graph at a measures the rate of change of the function at a 

triangle inequality  If a and b are any real numbers, then 
vertical asymptote  A function has a vertical asymptote at  if the limit as x approaches a from the right or left is 

infinite 

Key Equations 

Slope of a Secant Line 

Average Velocity over Interval 

Intuitive Definition of the Limit 

Two Important Limits 

One-Sided Limits 

Infinite Limits from the Left ∞ ∞

Infinite Limits from the Right ∞ ∞

∞ ∞  and ∞
Two-Sided Infinite Limits 

∞ ∞  and ∞

Basic Limit Results 

Important Limits 

Key Concepts 
2.1 A Preview of Calculus 

• Differential calculus arose from trying to solve the problem of determining the slope of a line tangent to a curve at a 
point. The slope of the tangent line indicates the rate of change of the function, also called the derivative. 
Calculating a derivative requires finding a limit. 

• Integral calculus arose from trying to solve the problem of finding the area of a region between the graph of a 
function and the x-axis. We can approximate the area by dividing it into thin rectangles and summing the areas of 
these rectangles. This summation leads to the value of a function called the integral. The integral is also calculated 
by finding a limit and, in fact, is related to the derivative of a function. 

• Multivariable calculus enables us to solve problems in three-dimensional space, including determining motion in 



184     2 • Chapter Review

space and finding volumes of solids. 

2.2 The Limit of a Function 
• A table of values or graph may be used to estimate a limit. 
• If the limit of a function at a point does not exist, it is still possible that the limits from the left and right at that point 

may exist. 
• If the limits of a function from the left and right exist and are equal, then the limit of the function is that common 

value. 
• We may use limits to describe infinite behavior of a function at a point. 

2.3 The Limit Laws 
• The limit laws allow us to evaluate limits of functions without having to go through step-by-step processes each 

time. 
• For polynomials and rational functions, 
• You can evaluate the limit of a function by factoring and canceling, by multiplying by a conjugate, or by simplifying a 

complex fraction. 
• The squeeze theorem allows you to find the limit of a function if the function is always greater than one function 

and less than another function with limits that are known. 

2.4 Continuity 
• For a function to be continuous at a point, it must be defined at that point, its limit must exist at the point, and the 

value of the function at that point must equal the value of the limit at that point. 
• Discontinuities may be classified as removable, jump, or infinite. 
• A function is continuous over an open interval if it is continuous at every point in the interval. It is continuous over a 

closed interval if it is continuous at every point in its interior and is continuous at its endpoints. 
• The composite function theorem states: If  is continuous at L and  then 

• The Intermediate Value Theorem guarantees that if a function is continuous over a closed interval, then the function 
takes on every value between the values at its endpoints. 

2.5 The Precise Definition of a Limit 
• The intuitive notion of a limit may be converted into a rigorous mathematical definition known as the epsilon-delta 

definition of the limit. 
• The epsilon-delta definition may be used to prove statements about limits. 
• The epsilon-delta definition of a limit may be modified to define one-sided limits. 

Review Exercises 
True or False. In the following exercises, justify your answer with a proof or a counterexample. 
208. A function has to be  209 . You can use the quotient  210 . If there is a vertical 

continuous at  if the rule to evaluate asymptote at  for 
 exists. the function  then f 

is undefined at the point 

Access for free at openstax.org



2 • Chapter Review     185

211. If  does not exist,  212 . Using the graph, find 
then f is undefined at the each limit or explain why 
point the limit does not exist. 

a. 
b. 
c. 

d. 

In the following exercises, evaluate the limit algebraically or explain why the limit does not exist. 

213.  214 .  215 . 

216.  217 .  218 . 

219.  220 .  221 . 

222. 

In the following exercises, use the squeeze theorem to prove the limit. 

223.  224 .  225 . Determine the domain 
such that the function 

 is 
continuous over its 
domain. 

In the following exercises, determine the value of c such that the function remains continuous. Draw your resulting 
function to ensure it is continuous. 

226.  227 . 



186     2 • Chapter Review

In the following exercises, use the precise definition of limit to prove the limit. 

228.  229 .  230 . A ball is thrown into the 
air and the vertical 
position is given by 

Use the Intermediate 
Value Theorem to show 
that the ball must land on 
the ground sometime 
between 5 sec and 6 sec 
after the throw. 

231. A particle moving along a  232 . From the previous 
line has a displacement exercises, estimate the 
according to the function instantaneous velocity at 

 where  by checking the 
x is measured in meters average velocity within 
and t is measured in 
seconds. Find the average 
velocity over the time 
period 

Access for free at openstax.org



3 • Introduction          187

3 DERIVATIVES 

Figure 3.1 The Hennessey Venom GT can go from 0 to 200 mph in 14.51 seconds. (credit: modification of work by 
Codex41, Flickr) 

Chapter Outline 
3.1 Defining the Derivative 
3.2 The Derivative as a Function 
3.3 Differentiation Rules 
3.4 Derivatives as Rates of Change 
3.5 Derivatives of Trigonometric Functions 
3.6 The Chain Rule 
3.7 Derivatives of Inverse Functions 
3.8 Implicit Differentiation 
3.9 Derivatives of Exponential and Logarithmic Functions 

Introduction 
The Hennessey Venom GT is one of the fastest cars in the world. In 2014, it reached a record-setting speed of 270.49 
mph. It can go from 0 to 200 mph in 14.51 seconds. The techniques in this chapter can be used to calculate the 
acceleration the Venom achieves in this feat (see Example 3.8.) 
Calculating velocity and changes in velocity are important uses of calculus, but it is far more widespread than that. 
Calculus is important in all branches of mathematics, science, and engineering, and it is critical to analysis in business 
and health as well. In this chapter, we explore one of the main tools of calculus, the derivative, and show convenient 
ways to calculate derivatives. We apply these rules to a variety of functions in this chapter so that we can then explore 
applications of these techniques. 



188     3 • Derivatives

3.1 Defining the Derivative 
Learning Objectives 

3.1.1 Recognize the meaning of the tangent to a curve at a point. 
3.1.2 Calculate the slope of a tangent line. 
3.1.3 Identify the derivative as the limit of a difference quotient. 
3.1.4 Calculate the derivative of a given function at a point. 
3.1.5 Describe the velocity as a rate of change. 
3.1.6 Explain the difference between average velocity and instantaneous velocity. 
3.1.7 Estimate the derivative from a table of values. 

Now that we have both a conceptual understanding of a limit and the practical ability to compute limits, we have 
established the foundation for our study of calculus, the branch of mathematics in which we compute derivatives and 
integrals. Most mathematicians and historians agree that calculus was developed independently by the Englishman 
Isaac Newton  and the German Gottfried Leibniz  whose images appear in Figure 3.2. When we 
credit Newton and Leibniz with developing calculus, we are really referring to the fact that Newton and Leibniz were the 
first to understand the relationship between the derivative and the integral. Both mathematicians benefited from the 
work of predecessors, such as Barrow, Fermat, and Cavalieri. The initial relationship between the two mathematicians 
appears to have been amicable; however, in later years a bitter controversy erupted over whose work took precedence. 
Although it seems likely that Newton did, indeed, arrive at the ideas behind calculus first, we are indebted to Leibniz for 
the notation that we commonly use today. 

Figure 3.2 Newton and Leibniz are credited with developing calculus independently. 

Tangent Lines 
We begin our study of calculus by revisiting the notion of secant lines and tangent lines. Recall that we used the slope of 
a secant line to a function at a point  to estimate the rate of change, or the rate at which one variable changes in 
relation to another variable. We can obtain the slope of the secant by choosing a value of  near  and drawing a line 
through the points  and  as shown in Figure 3.3. The slope of this line is given by an equation in the 
form of a difference quotient: 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.1 • Defining the Derivative     189

We can also calculate the slope of a secant line to a function at a value a by using this equation and replacing  with 
 where  is a value close to 0. We can then calculate the slope of the line through the points  and 

 In this case, we find the secant line has a slope given by the following difference quotient with 
increment 

Definition 

Let  be a function defined on an interval  containing  If  is in  then 

(3.1) 

is a difference quotient. 

Also, if  is chosen so that  is in  then 

(3.2) 

is a difference quotient with increment 

 MEDIA 

View the development of the derivative (http://www.openstax.org/l/20_calcapplets) with this applet. 

These two expressions for calculating the slope of a secant line are illustrated in Figure 3.3. We will see that each of these 
two methods for finding the slope of a secant line is of value. Depending on the setting, we can choose one or the other. 
The primary consideration in our choice usually depends on ease of calculation. 

Figure 3.3 We can calculate the slope of a secant line in either of two ways. 
In Figure 3.4(a) we see that, as the values of  approach  the slopes of the secant lines provide better estimates of the 
rate of change of the function at  Furthermore, the secant lines themselves approach the tangent line to the function 
at  which represents the limit of the secant lines. Similarly, Figure 3.4(b) shows that as the values of  get closer to 
the secant lines also approach the tangent line. The slope of the tangent line at  is the rate of change of the function at 

 as shown in Figure 3.4(c). 



190     3 • Derivatives

Figure 3.4 The secant lines approach the tangent line (shown in green) as the second point approaches the first. 

 MEDIA 

You can use this site (http://www.openstax.org/l/20_diffmicros) to explore graphs to see if they have a tangent line 
at a point. 

In Figure 3.5 we show the graph of  and its tangent line at  in a series of tighter intervals about  As 
the intervals become narrower, the graph of the function and its tangent line appear to coincide, making the values on 
the tangent line a good approximation to the values of the function for choices of  close to  In fact, the graph of 
itself appears to be locally linear in the immediate vicinity of 

Figure 3.5 For values of  close to  the graph of  and its tangent line appear to coincide. 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.1 • Defining the Derivative     191

Formally we may define the tangent line to the graph of a function as follows. 

Definition 

Let  be a function defined in an open interval containing  The tangent line to  at  is the line passing 
through the point  having slope 

(3.3) 

provided this limit exists. 

Equivalently, we may define the tangent line to  at  to be the line passing through the point  having 
slope 

(3.4) 

provided this limit exists. 

Just as we have used two different expressions to define the slope of a secant line, we use two different forms to define 
the slope of the tangent line. In this text we use both forms of the definition. As before, the choice of definition will 
depend on the setting. Now that we have formally defined a tangent line to a function at a point, we can use this 
definition to find equations of tangent lines. 

EXAMPLE 3.1 

Finding a Tangent Line 
Find an equation of the line tangent to the graph of  at 

Solution 
First find the slope of the tangent line. In this example, use Equation 3.3. 

Next, find a point on the tangent line. Since the line is tangent to the graph of  at  it passes through the point 
 We have  so the tangent line passes through the point 

Using the point-slope equation of the line with the slope  and the point  we obtain the line 
Simplifying, we have  The graph of  and its tangent line at  are shown in Figure 3.6. 

Figure 3.6 The tangent line to  at 



192     3 • Derivatives

EXAMPLE 3.2 

The Slope of a Tangent Line Revisited 
Use Equation 3.4 to find the slope of the line tangent to the graph of  at 

Solution 
The steps are very similar to Example 3.1. See Equation 3.4 for the definition. 

We obtained the same value for the slope of the tangent line by using the other definition, demonstrating that the 
formulas can be interchanged. 

EXAMPLE 3.3 

Finding the Equation of a Tangent Line 
Find an equation of the line tangent to the graph of  at 

Solution 
We can use Equation 3.3, but as we have seen, the results are the same if we use Equation 3.4. 

We now know that the slope of the tangent line is  To find an equation of the tangent line, we also need a point on 
the line. We know that  Since the tangent line passes through the point  we can use the point-slope 
equation of a line to find an equation of the tangent line. Thus the tangent line has the equation  The 
graphs of  and  are shown in Figure 3.7. 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.1 • Defining the Derivative     193

Figure 3.7 The line is tangent to  at 

 3.1 Find the slope of the line tangent to the graph of  at 

The Derivative of a Function at a Point 
The type of limit we compute in order to find the slope of the line tangent to a function at a point occurs in many 
applications across many disciplines. These applications include velocity and acceleration in physics, marginal profit 
functions in business, and growth rates in biology. This limit occurs so frequently that we give this value a special name: 
the derivative. The process of finding a derivative is called differentiation. 

Definition 

Let  be a function defined in an open interval containing  The derivative of the function  at  denoted by 
 is defined by 

(3.5) 

provided this limit exists. 

Alternatively, we may also define the derivative of  at  as 

(3.6) 

EXAMPLE 3.4 

Estimating a Derivative 
For  use a table to estimate  using Equation 3.5. 

Solution 
Create a table using values of  just below  and just above 



194     3 • Derivatives

After examining the table, we see that a good estimate is 

 3.2 For  use a table to estimate  using Equation 3.6. 

EXAMPLE 3.5 

Finding a Derivative 
For  find  by using Equation 3.5. 

Solution 
Substitute the given function and value directly into the equation. 

EXAMPLE 3.6 

Revisiting the Derivative 
For  find  by using Equation 3.6. 

Solution 
Using this equation, we can substitute two values of the function into the equation, and we should get the same value as 
in Example 3.5. 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.1 • Defining the Derivative     195

The results are the same whether we use Equation 3.5 or Equation 3.6. 

 3.3 For  find 

Velocities and Rates of Change 
Now that we can evaluate a derivative, we can use it in velocity applications. Recall that if  is the position of an object 
moving along a coordinate axis, the average velocity of the object over a time interval  if  or  if  is 
given by the difference quotient 

(3.7) 

As the values of  approach  the values of  approach the value we call the instantaneous velocity at  That is, 
instantaneous velocity at  denoted  is given by 

(3.8) 

To better understand the relationship between average velocity and instantaneous velocity, see Figure 3.8. In this figure, 
the slope of the tangent line (shown in red) is the instantaneous velocity of the object at time  whose position at 
time  is given by the function  The slope of the secant line (shown in green) is the average velocity of the object 
over the time interval 

Figure 3.8 The slope of the secant line is the average velocity over the interval  The slope of the tangent line is the 
instantaneous velocity. 
We can use Equation 3.5 to calculate the instantaneous velocity, or we can estimate the velocity of a moving object by 
using a table of values. We can then confirm the estimate by using Equation 3.7. 

EXAMPLE 3.7 

Estimating Velocity 
A lead weight on a spring is oscillating up and down. Its position at time  with respect to a fixed horizontal line is given 
by  (Figure 3.9). Use a table of values to estimate  Check the estimate by using Equation 3.5. 

Figure 3.9 A lead weight suspended from a spring in vertical oscillatory motion. 

Solution 
We can estimate the instantaneous velocity at  by computing a table of average velocities using values of 



196     3 • Derivatives

approaching  as shown in Table 3.1. 

Table 3.1 Average velocities 
using values of t 
approaching 0 

From the table we see that the average velocity over the time interval  is  the average velocity over 
the time interval  is  and so forth. Using this table of values, it appears that a good estimate is 

By using Equation 3.5, we can see that 

Thus, in fact, 

 3.4 A rock is dropped from a height of  feet. Its height above ground at time  seconds later is given by 
 Find its instantaneous velocity  second after it is dropped, using Equation 

3.5. 

As we have seen throughout this section, the slope of a tangent line to a function and instantaneous velocity are related 
concepts. Each is calculated by computing a derivative and each measures the instantaneous rate of change of a 
function, or the rate of change of a function at any point along the function. 

Definition 

The instantaneous rate of change of a function  at a value  is its derivative 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.1 • Defining the Derivative     197

EXAMPLE 3.8 

Chapter Opener: Estimating Rate of Change of Velocity 

Figure 3.10 (credit: modification of work by Codex41, Flickr) 
Reaching a top speed of  mph, the Hennessey Venom GT is one of the fastest cars in the world. In tests it went 
from  to  mph in  seconds, from  mph in  seconds, from  mph in  seconds, and from 

 mph in  seconds. Use this data to draw a conclusion about the rate of change of velocity (that is, its 
acceleration) as it approaches  mph. Does the rate at which the car is accelerating appear to be increasing, 
decreasing, or constant? 

Solution 
First observe that  mph =  ft/s,  mph  ft/s,  mph  ft/s, and  mph  ft/s. We can 
summarize the information in a table. 

Table 3.2  at 
different values 
of t 

Now compute the average acceleration of the car in feet per second per second on intervals of the form  as 
approaches  as shown in the following table. 

Table 3.3 Average acceleration 

The rate at which the car is accelerating is decreasing as its velocity approaches  mph  ft/s). 



198     3 • Derivatives

EXAMPLE 3.9 

Rate of Change of Temperature 
A homeowner sets the thermostat so that the temperature in the house begins to drop from  at  p.m., reaches a 
low of  during the night, and rises back to  by  a.m. the next morning. Suppose that the temperature in the 
house is given by  for  where  is the number of hours past  p.m. Find the 
instantaneous rate of change of the temperature at midnight. 

Solution 
Since midnight is  hours past  p.m., we want to compute  Refer to Equation 3.5. 

The instantaneous rate of change of the temperature at midnight is  per hour. 

EXAMPLE 3.10 

Rate of Change of Profit 
A toy company can sell  electronic gaming systems at a price of  dollars per gaming system. The cost 
of manufacturing  systems is given by  dollars. Find the rate of change of profit when 
games are produced. Should the toy company increase or decrease production? 

Solution 
The profit  earned by producing  gaming systems is  where  is the revenue obtained from the 
sale of  games. Since the company can sell  games at  per game, 

Consequently, 

Therefore, evaluating the rate of change of profit gives 

Since the rate of change of profit  and  the company should increase production. 

 3.5 A coffee shop determines that the daily profit on scones obtained by charging  dollars per scone is 
 The coffee shop currently charges  per scone. Find  the rate of 

change of profit when the price is  and decide whether or not the coffee shop should consider raising 
or lowering its prices on scones. 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.1 • Defining the Derivative     199

 SECTION 3.1 EXERCISES 
For the following exercises, use Equation 3.1 to find the slope of the secant line between the values  and  for each 
function 

1 .  2 .  3 . 

4 .  5 .  6 . 

7 .  8 .  9 . 

10 . 

For the following functions, 
a. use Equation 3.4 to find the slope of the tangent line  and 
b. find an equation of the tangent line to  at 

11 .  12 .  13 . 

14 .  15 .  16 . 

17 .  18 .  19 . 

20 . 

For the following functions  find  using Equation 3.5. 

21 .  22 .  23 . 

24 .  25 .  26 . 

27 .  28 .  29 . 

30 . 

For the following exercises, given the function 
a. find the slope of the secant line  for each point  with  value given in the table. 
b. Use the answers from a. to estimate the value of the slope of the tangent line at 
c. Use the answer from b. to find an equation of the tangent line to  at point 



200     3 • Derivatives

31 . [T]  (Round  32 . [T] 
to  decimal places.) 

Slope Slope 
Slope Slope x x 

x x 

0.1 (i) (vii) 
1.1 (i) 0.9 (vii) 

0.01 (ii) (viii) 
1.01 (ii) 0.99 (viii) 

0.001 (iii) (ix) 
1.001 (iii) 0.999 (ix) 

0.0001 (iv) (x) 
1.0001 (iv) 0.9999 (x) 

0.00001 (v) (xi) 
1.00001 (v) 0.99999 (xi) 

0.000001 (vi) (xii) 
1.000001 (vi) 0.999999 (xii) 

33 . [T]  34 . [T] 

(Round to  decimal x Slope 
places.) 

3.1 (i) 
x Slope 

3.14 (ii) 
(i) 

3.141 (iii) 
(ii) 

3.1415 (iv) 
(iii) 

3.14159 (v) 
(iv) 

3.141592 (vi) 
(v) 

−0.000001 (vi) 

[T] For the following position functions  an object is moving along a straight line, where  is in seconds and  is 
in meters. Find 

a. the simplified expression for the average velocity from  to 
b. the average velocity between  and  where    and 

and 
c. use the answer from a. to estimate the instantaneous velocity at  second. 

35 .  36 .  37 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.1 • Defining the Derivative     201

38 .  39 . Use the following graph to  40 . Use the following graph to 
evaluate a.  and b. evaluate a.  and b. 

For the following exercises, use the limit definition of derivative to show that the derivative does not exist at  for 
each of the given functions. 

41 .  42 .  43 . 

44 .  45 . [T] The position in feet of a  46 . [T] The distance in feet that 
race car along a straight a ball rolls down an incline 
track after  seconds is is modeled by the function 
modeled by the function  where t is 

seconds after the ball 
a. Find the average begins rolling. 

velocity of the vehicle a. Find the average 
over the following time velocity of the ball over 
intervals to four decimal the following time 
places: intervals: 

i. [4, 4.1] i. [5, 5.1] 
ii. [4, 4.01] ii. [5, 5.01] 
iii. [4, 4.001] iii. [5, 5.001] 
iv. [4, 4.0001] iv. [5, 5.0001] 

b. Use a. to draw a b. Use the answers from a. 
conclusion about the to draw a conclusion 
instantaneous velocity about the 
of the vehicle at instantaneous velocity 
seconds. of the ball at 

seconds. 



202     3 • Derivatives

47 . Two vehicles start out traveling side48 . [T] The total cost  in  49 . [T] For the function 
by side along a straight road. Their hundreds of dollars, to produce 
position functions, shown in the  thousand jars of mayonnaise do the following. 
following graph, are given by is given by a. Use a graphing calculator 

 and  where  is to graph f in an 
measured in feet and  is measured a. Calculate the average cost appropriate viewing 
in seconds. per jar over the following window. 

intervals: b. Use the ZOOM feature on 
i. [100, 100.1] the calculator to 
ii. [100, 100.01] approximate the two 
iii. [100, 100.001] values of  for which 
iv. [100, 100.0001] 

b. Use the answers from a. to 
estimate the average cost to 
produce  jars of 
mayonnaise. 

a. Which vehicle has traveled 
farther at  seconds? 

b. What is the approximate velocity 
of each vehicle at  seconds? 

c. Which vehicle is traveling faster 
at  seconds? 

d. What is true about the positions 
of the vehicles at  seconds? 

50 . [T] For the function  51 . Suppose that  52 . [T] For the function 
 do the computes the number of  do the 

following. gallons of gas used by a following. 
a. Use a graphing vehicle traveling  miles. a. Use a graphing calculator 

calculator to graph  in Suppose the vehicle gets to graph  in an 
an appropriate viewing  mpg. appropriate viewing 
window. a. Find a mathematical window. 

b. Use the ZOOM feature expression for b. Use the  function, 
on the calculator to b. What is which numerically finds 
approximate the values Explain the physical the derivative, on a 
of  for which meaning. graphing calculator to 

c. What is estimate 
Explain the physical 
meaning. and 

53 . [T] For the function 
 do the 

following. 
a. Use a graphing 

calculator to graph  in 
an appropriate viewing 
window. 

b. Use the  function 
on a graphing 
calculator to find 

and 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.2 • The Derivative as a Function     203

3.2 The Derivative as a Function 
Learning Objectives 

3.2.1 Define the derivative function of a given function. 
3.2.2 Graph a derivative function from the graph of a given function. 
3.2.3 State the connection between derivatives and continuity. 
3.2.4 Describe three conditions for when a function does not have a derivative. 
3.2.5 Explain the meaning of a higher-order derivative. 

As we have seen, the derivative of a function at a given point gives us the rate of change or slope of the tangent line to 
the function at that point. If we differentiate a position function at a given time, we obtain the velocity at that time. It 
seems reasonable to conclude that knowing the derivative of the function at every point would produce valuable 
information about the behavior of the function. However, the process of finding the derivative at even a handful of 
values using the techniques of the preceding section would quickly become quite tedious. In this section we define the 
derivative function and learn a process for finding it. 

Derivative Functions 
The derivative function gives the derivative of a function at each point in the domain of the original function for which 
the derivative is defined. We can formally define a derivative function as follows. 

Definition 

Let  be a function. The derivative function, denoted by  is the function whose domain consists of those values of 
 such that the following limit exists: 

(3.9) 

A function  is said to be differentiable at  if  exists. More generally, a function is said to be differentiable on 
 if it is differentiable at every point in an open set  and a differentiable function is one in which  exists on its 

domain. 
In the next few examples we use Equation 3.9 to find the derivative of a function. 

EXAMPLE 3.11 

Finding the Derivative of a Square-Root Function 
Find the derivative of 

Solution 
Start directly with the definition of the derivative function. Use Equation 3.1. 



204     3 • Derivatives

EXAMPLE 3.12 

Finding the Derivative of a Quadratic Function 
Find the derivative of the function 

Solution 
Follow the same procedure here, but without having to multiply by the conjugate. 

 3.6 Find the derivative of 

We use a variety of different notations to express the derivative of a function. In Example 3.12 we showed that if 
 then  If we had expressed this function in the form  we could have 

expressed the derivative as  or  We could have conveyed the same information by writing 
 Thus, for the function  each of the following notations represents the derivative of 

In place of  we may also use  Use of the  notation (called Leibniz notation) is quite common in 

engineering and physics. To understand this notation better, recall that the derivative of a function at a point is the limit 
of the slopes of secant lines as the secant lines approach the tangent line. The slopes of these secant lines are often 
expressed in the form  where  is the difference in the  values corresponding to the difference in the  values, 
which are expressed as  (Figure 3.11). Thus the derivative, which can be thought of as the instantaneous rate of 
change of  with respect to  is expressed as 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.2 • The Derivative as a Function     205

Figure 3.11 The derivative is expressed as 

Graphing a Derivative 
We have already discussed how to graph a function, so given the equation of a function or the equation of a derivative 
function, we could graph it. Given both, we would expect to see a correspondence between the graphs of these two 
functions, since  gives the rate of change of a function  (or slope of the tangent line to 

In Example 3.11 we found that for  If we graph these functions on the same axes, as in 

Figure 3.12, we can use the graphs to understand the relationship between these two functions. First, we notice that 
 is increasing over its entire domain, which means that the slopes of its tangent lines at all points are positive. 

Consequently, we expect  for all values of  in its domain. Furthermore, as  increases, the slopes of the 
tangent lines to  are decreasing and we expect to see a corresponding decrease in  We also observe that 
is undefined and that ∞  corresponding to a vertical tangent to  at 

Figure 3.12 The derivative  is positive everywhere because the function  is increasing. 

In Example 3.12 we found that for  The graphs of these functions are shown in Figure 
3.13. Observe that  is decreasing for  For these same values of  For values of  is 
increasing and  Also,  has a horizontal tangent at  and 



206     3 • Derivatives

Figure 3.13 The derivative  where the function  is decreasing and  where  is increasing. The 
derivative is zero where the function has a horizontal tangent. 

EXAMPLE 3.13 

Sketching a Derivative Using a Function 
Use the following graph of  to sketch a graph of 

Solution 
The solution is shown in the following graph. Observe that  is increasing and  on  Also,  is 
decreasing and  on ∞  and on ∞  Also note that  has horizontal tangents at  and  and 

 and 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.2 • The Derivative as a Function     207

 3.7 Sketch the graph of  On what interval is the graph of  above the -axis? 

Derivatives and Continuity 
Now that we can graph a derivative, let’s examine the behavior of the graphs. First, we consider the relationship between 
differentiability and continuity. We will see that if a function is differentiable at a point, it must be continuous there; 
however, a function that is continuous at a point need not be differentiable at that point. In fact, a function may be 
continuous at a point and fail to be differentiable at the point for one of several reasons. 

Theorem 3.1 

Differentiability Implies Continuity 
Let  be a function and  be in its domain. If  is differentiable at  then  is continuous at 

Proof 
If  is differentiable at  then  exists and 

We want to show that  is continuous at  by showing that  Thus, 

Therefore, since  is defined and  we conclude that  is continuous at 

□ 
We have just proven that differentiability implies continuity, but now we consider whether continuity implies 
differentiability. To determine an answer to this question, we examine the function  This function is 



208     3 • Derivatives

continuous everywhere; however,  is undefined. This observation leads us to believe that continuity does not imply 
differentiability. Let’s explore further. For 

This limit does not exist because 

See Figure 3.14. 

Figure 3.14 The function  is continuous at  but is not differentiable at 
Let’s consider some additional situations in which a continuous function fails to be differentiable. Consider the function 

∞

Thus  does not exist. A quick look at the graph of  clarifies the situation. The function has a vertical 
tangent line at  (Figure 3.15). 

Figure 3.15 The function  has a vertical tangent at  It is continuous at  but is not differentiable at 

The function  also has a derivative that exhibits interesting behavior at  We see that 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.2 • The Derivative as a Function     209

This limit does not exist, essentially because the slopes of the secant lines continuously change direction as they 
approach zero (Figure 3.16). 

Figure 3.16 The function  is not differentiable at 

In summary: 
1. We observe that if a function is not continuous, it cannot be differentiable, since every differentiable function must 

be continuous. However, if a function is continuous, it may still fail to be differentiable. 
2. We saw that  failed to be differentiable at  because the limit of the slopes of the tangent lines on the left 

and right were not the same. Visually, this resulted in a sharp corner on the graph of the function at  From this we 
conclude that in order to be differentiable at a point, a function must be “smooth” at that point. 

3. As we saw in the example of  a function fails to be differentiable at a point where there is a vertical 
tangent line. 

4. As we saw with  a function may fail to be differentiable at a point in more complicated 

ways as well. 

EXAMPLE 3.14 

A Piecewise Function that is Continuous and Differentiable 
A toy company wants to design a track for a toy car that starts out along a parabolic curve and then converts to a 

straight line (Figure 3.17). The function that describes the track is to have the form 

where  and  are in inches. For the car to move smoothly along the track, the function  must be both 
continuous and differentiable at  Find values of  and  that make  both continuous and differentiable. 



210     3 • Derivatives

Figure 3.17 For the car to move smoothly along the track, the function must be both continuous and differentiable. 

Solution 
For the function to be continuous at  Thus, since 

and  we must have  Equivalently, we have 
For the function to be differentiable at 

must exist. Since  is defined using different rules on the right and the left, we must evaluate this limit from the right 
and the left and then set them equal to each other: 

We also have 

This gives us  Thus  and 

 3.8 Find values of  and  that make  both continuous and differentiable at 

Higher-Order Derivatives 
The derivative of a function is itself a function, so we can find the derivative of a derivative. For example, the derivative of 
a position function is the rate of change of position, or velocity. The derivative of velocity is the rate of change of velocity, 
which is acceleration. The new function obtained by differentiating the derivative is called the second derivative. 
Furthermore, we can continue to take derivatives to obtain the third derivative, fourth derivative, and so on. Collectively, 
these are referred to as higher-order derivatives. The notation for the higher-order derivatives of  can be 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.2 • The Derivative as a Function     211

expressed in any of the following forms: 

It is interesting to note that the notation for  may be viewed as an attempt to express  more compactly. 

Analogously, 

EXAMPLE 3.15 

Finding a Second Derivative 
For  find 

Solution 
First find 

Next, find  by taking the derivative of 

 3.9 Find  for 

EXAMPLE 3.16 

Finding Acceleration 
The position of a particle along a coordinate axis at time  (in seconds) is given by  (in meters). Find 
the function that describes its acceleration at time 

Solution 
Since  and  we begin by finding the derivative of 



212     3 • Derivatives

Next, 

Thus, 

 3.10 For  find 

 SECTION 3.2 EXERCISES 
For the following exercises, use the definition of a derivative to find 

54 .  55 .  56 . 

57 .  58 .  59 . 

60 .  61 .  62 . 

63 . 

For the following exercises, use the graph of  to sketch the graph of its derivative 
64 .  65 .  66 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.2 • The Derivative as a Function     213

67 . 

For the following exercises, the given limit represents the derivative of a function  at  Find  and 

68 .  69 .  70 . 

71 .  72 .  73 . 

For the following functions, 
a. sketch the graph and 
b. use the definition of a derivative to show that the function is not differentiable at 

74 .  75 .  76 . 

77 . 

For the following graphs, 
a. determine for which values of  the  exists but  is not continuous at  and 
b. determine for which values of  the function is continuous but not differentiable at 

78 .  79 .  80 . Use the graph to evaluate a. 
 b.  c.  d. 

 and e.  if it exists. 

For the following functions, use  to find 

81 .  82 .  83 . 



214     3 • Derivatives

For the following exercises, use a calculator to graph  Determine the function  then use a calculator to 
graph 

84 . [T]  85 . [T]  86 . [T] 

87 . [T]  88 . [T]  89 . [T] 

For the following exercises, describe what the two expressions represent in terms of each of the given situations. Be sure 
to include units. 

a. 
b. 

90 .  denotes the  91 .  denotes the total  92 .  denotes the total cost 
population of a city at time amount of money (in (in thousands of dollars) of 

 in years. thousands of dollars) spent manufacturing  clock 
on concessions by radios. 
customers at an 
amusement park. 

93 .  denotes the grade (in  94 .  denotes the cost (in  95 .  denotes atmospheric 
percentage points) dollars) of a sociology pressure in Torrs at an 
received on a test, given textbook at university altitude of  feet. 
hours of studying. bookstores in the United 

States in  years since 

96 . Sketch the graph of a  97 . Suppose temperature  in  98 . Suppose the total profit of 
function  with all degrees Fahrenheit at a a company is 
of the following properties: height  in feet above the thousand dollars when 
a.  for ground is given by units of an item are sold. 

a. What does  for 
b. a. Give a physical  measure, and 
c.  for interpretation, with what are the units? 
d.  and units, of b. What does 
e.  and b. If we know that measure, and what are 

∞ the units? 
∞ explain the physical c. Suppose that 

∞ meaning.  what is the 
f.  does not exist. approximate change in 

profit if the number of 
items sold increases 
from 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.2 • The Derivative as a Function     215

99 . The graph in the following figure 
models the number of people 
who have come down with the flu 
weeks after its initial outbreak in a 
town with a population of 
citizens. 
a. Describe what  represents 

and how it behaves as 
increases. 

b. What does the derivative tell us 
about how this town is affected 
by the flu outbreak? 

For the following exercises, use the following table, which shows the height  of the Saturn  rocket for the Apollo 
mission  seconds after launch. 

Time (seconds) Height (meters) 

100. What is the physical  101 . [T] Construct a table of  102 . [T] The best linear fit to 
meaning of  What values for  and the data is given by 
are the units? graph both  and 

on the same graph. (Hint: where  is the height of 
for interior points, the rocket (in meters) and 
estimate both the left  is the time elapsed since 
limit and right limit and takeoff. From this 
average them. An interior equation, determine 
point of an interval I is an  Graph  with 
element of I which is not the given data and, on a 
an endpoint of I.) separate coordinate 

plane, graph 



216     3 • Derivatives

103. [T] The best quadratic fit to the  104 . [T] The best cubic fit to the data is given by 
data is given by 

where  is the height of the rocket (in m) and 
where  is the height of the rocket  is the time elapsed since take off. From this 
(in meters) and  is the time elapsed equation, determine  Graph  with 
since takeoff. From this equation, the given data and, on a separate coordinate 
determine  Graph  with plane, graph  Does the linear, 
the given data and, on a separate quadratic, or cubic function fit the data best? 
coordinate plane, graph 

105. Using the best linear, 
quadratic, and cubic fits 
to the data, determine 
what 

are. What are the physical 
meanings of 

and what are their units? 

3.3 Differentiation Rules 
Learning Objectives 

3.3.1 State the constant, constant multiple, and power rules. 
3.3.2 Apply the sum and difference rules to combine derivatives. 
3.3.3 Use the product rule for finding the derivative of a product of functions. 
3.3.4 Use the quotient rule for finding the derivative of a quotient of functions. 
3.3.5 Extend the power rule to functions with negative exponents. 
3.3.6 Combine the differentiation rules to find the derivative of a polynomial or rational function. 

Finding derivatives of functions by using the definition of the derivative can be a lengthy and, for certain functions, a 
rather challenging process. For example, previously we found that  by using a process that involved 

multiplying an expression by a conjugate prior to evaluating a limit. The process that we could use to evaluate 
using the definition, while similar, is more complicated. In this section, we develop rules for finding derivatives that allow 
us to bypass this process. We begin with the basics. 

The Basic Rules 
The functions  and  where  is a positive integer are the building blocks from which all polynomials 
and rational functions are constructed. To find derivatives of polynomials and rational functions efficiently without 
resorting to the limit definition of the derivative, we must first develop formulas for differentiating these basic functions. 

The Constant Rule 
We first apply the limit definition of the derivative to find the derivative of the constant function,  For this 
function, both  and  so we obtain the following result: 

The rule for differentiating constant functions is called the constant rule. It states that the derivative of a constant 
function is zero; that is, since a constant function is a horizontal line, the slope, or the rate of change, of a constant 
function is  We restate this rule in the following theorem. 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.3 • Differentiation Rules     217

Theorem 3.2 

The Constant Rule 
Let  be a constant. 

If  then 

Alternatively, we may express this rule as 

EXAMPLE 3.17 

Applying the Constant Rule 
Find the derivative of 

Solution 
This is just a one-step application of the rule: 

 3.11 Find the derivative of 

The Power Rule 
We have shown that 

At this point, you might see a pattern beginning to develop for derivatives of the form  We continue our 
examination of derivative formulas by differentiating power functions of the form  where  is a positive 
integer. We develop formulas for derivatives of this type of function in stages, beginning with positive integer powers. 
Before stating and proving the general rule for derivatives of functions of this form, we take a look at a specific case, 

 As we go through this derivation, note that the technique used in this case is essentially the same as the 
technique used to prove the general case. 

EXAMPLE 3.18 

Differentiating 
Find 



218     3 • Derivatives

Solution 

 3.12 Find 

As we shall see, the procedure for finding the derivative of the general form  is very similar. Although it is 
often unwise to draw general conclusions from specific examples, we note that when we differentiate  the 
power on  becomes the coefficient of  in the derivative and the power on  in the derivative decreases by 1. The 
following theorem states that the power rule holds for all positive integer powers of  We will eventually extend this 
result to negative integer powers. Later, we will see that this rule may also be extended first to rational powers of  and 
then to arbitrary powers of  Be aware, however, that this rule does not apply to functions in which a constant is raised 
to a variable power, such as 

Theorem 3.3 

The Power Rule 
Let  be a positive integer. If  then 

Alternatively, we may express this rule as 

Proof 
For  where  is a positive integer, we have 

we see that 

Next, divide both sides by h: 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.3 • Differentiation Rules     219

Thus, 

Finally, 

□ 

EXAMPLE 3.19 

Applying the Power Rule 
Find the derivative of the function  by applying the power rule. 

Solution 
Using the power rule with  we obtain 

 3.13 Find the derivative of 

The Sum, Difference, and Constant Multiple Rules 
We find our next differentiation rules by looking at derivatives of sums, differences, and constant multiples of functions. 
Just as when we work with functions, there are rules that make it easier to find derivatives of functions that we add, 
subtract, or multiply by a constant. These rules are summarized in the following theorem. 

Theorem 3.4 

Sum, Difference, and Constant Multiple Rules 
Let  and  be differentiable functions and  be a constant. Then each of the following equations holds. 

Sum Rule. The derivative of the sum of a function  and a function  is the same as the sum of the derivative of  and 
the derivative of 

that is, 

Difference Rule. The derivative of the difference of a function f and a function g is the same as the difference of the 
derivative of f and the derivative of 

that is, 

Constant Multiple Rule. The derivative of a constant k multiplied by a function f is the same as the constant 
multiplied by the derivative: 

that is, 



220     3 • Derivatives

Proof 
We provide only the proof of the sum rule here. The rest follow in a similar manner. 
For differentiable functions  and  we set  Using the limit definition of the derivative we 
have 

By substituting  and  we obtain 

Rearranging and regrouping the terms, we have 

We now apply the sum law for limits and the definition of the derivative to obtain 

□ 

EXAMPLE 3.20 

Applying the Constant Multiple Rule 
Find the derivative of  and compare it to the derivative of 

Solution 
We use the power rule directly: 

Since  has derivative  we see that the derivative of  is 3 times the derivative of  This 
relationship is illustrated in Figure 3.18. 

Figure 3.18 The derivative of  is 3 times the derivative of 

EXAMPLE 3.21 

Applying Basic Derivative Rules 
Find the derivative of 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.3 • Differentiation Rules     221

Solution 
We begin by applying the rule for differentiating the sum of two functions, followed by the rules for differentiating 
constant multiples of functions and the rule for differentiating powers. To better understand the sequence in which the 
differentiation rules are applied, we use Leibniz notation throughout the solution: 

 3.14 Find the derivative of 

EXAMPLE 3.22 

Finding the Equation of a Tangent Line 
Find an equation of the line tangent to the graph of  at 

Solution 
To find an equation of the tangent line, we need a point and a slope. To find the point, compute 

This gives us the point  Since the slope of the tangent line at 1 is  we must first find  Using the 
definition of a derivative, we have 

so the slope of the tangent line is  Using the point-slope formula, we see that the equation of the tangent 
line is 

Putting the equation of the line in slope-intercept form, we obtain 

 3.15 Find an equation of the line tangent to the graph of  at  Use the point-slope form. 

The Product Rule 
Now that we have examined the basic rules, we can begin looking at some of the more advanced rules. The first one 
examines the derivative of the product of two functions. Although it might be tempting to assume that the derivative of 
the product is the product of the derivatives, similar to the sum and difference rules, the product rule does not follow 
this pattern. To see why we cannot use this pattern, consider the function  whose derivative is 
and not 

Theorem 3.5 

Product Rule 
Let  and  be differentiable functions. Then 

That is, 



222     3 • Derivatives

This means that the derivative of a product of two functions is the derivative of the first function times the second 
function plus the derivative of the second function times the first function. 

Proof 
We begin by assuming that  and  are differentiable functions. At a key point in this proof we need to use the fact 
that, since  is differentiable, it is also continuous. In particular, we use the fact that since  is continuous, 

By applying the limit definition of the derivative to  we obtain 

By adding and subtracting  in the numerator, we have 

After breaking apart this quotient and applying the sum law for limits, the derivative becomes 

Rearranging, we obtain 

By using the continuity of  the definition of the derivatives of  and  and applying the limit laws, we arrive 
at the product rule, 

□ 

EXAMPLE 3.23 

Applying the Product Rule to Functions at a Point 
For  use the product rule to find  if  and 

Solution 
Since  and hence 

EXAMPLE 3.24 

Applying the Product Rule to Binomials 
For  find  by applying the product rule. Check the result by first finding the product and 
then differentiating. 

Solution 
If we set  and  then  and  Thus, 

Simplifying, we have 

To check, we see that  and, consequently, 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.3 • Differentiation Rules     223

 3.16 Use the product rule to obtain the derivative of 

The Quotient Rule 
Having developed and practiced the product rule, we now consider differentiating quotients of functions. As we see in 
the following theorem, the derivative of the quotient is not the quotient of the derivatives; rather, it is the derivative of 
the function in the numerator times the function in the denominator minus the derivative of the function in the 
denominator times the function in the numerator, all divided by the square of the function in the denominator. In order 
to better grasp why we cannot simply take the quotient of the derivatives, keep in mind that 

Theorem 3.6 

The Quotient Rule 
Let  and  be differentiable functions. Then 

That is, 

The proof of the quotient rule is very similar to the proof of the product rule, so it is omitted here. Instead, we apply this 
new rule for finding derivatives in the next example. 

EXAMPLE 3.25 

Applying the Quotient Rule 
Use the quotient rule to find the derivative of 

Solution 
Let  and  Thus,  and  Substituting into the quotient rule, we have 

Simplifying, we obtain 

 3.17 Find the derivative of 

It is now possible to use the quotient rule to extend the power rule to find derivatives of functions of the form  where 
 is a negative integer. 

Theorem 3.7 

Extended Power Rule 
If  is a negative integer, then 



224     3 • Derivatives

Proof 
If  is a negative integer, we may set  so that n is a positive integer with  Since for each positive integer 

 we may now apply the quotient rule by setting  and  In this case,  and 
 Thus, 

Simplifying, we see that 

Finally, observe that since  by substituting we have 

□ 

EXAMPLE 3.26 

Using the Extended Power Rule 
Find 

Solution 
By applying the extended power rule with  we obtain 

EXAMPLE 3.27 

Using the Extended Power Rule and the Constant Multiple Rule 
Use the extended power rule and the constant multiple rule to find the derivative of 

Solution 
It may seem tempting to use the quotient rule to find this derivative, and it would certainly not be incorrect to do so. 
However, it is far easier to differentiate this function by first rewriting it as 

 3.18 Find the derivative of  using the extended power rule. 

Combining Differentiation Rules 
As we have seen throughout the examples in this section, it seldom happens that we are called on to apply just one 
differentiation rule to find the derivative of a given function. At this point, by combining the differentiation rules, we may 
find the derivatives of any polynomial or rational function. Later on we will encounter more complex combinations of 
differentiation rules. A good rule of thumb to use when applying several rules is to apply the rules in reverse of the order 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.3 • Differentiation Rules     225

in which we would evaluate the function. 

EXAMPLE 3.28 

Combining Differentiation Rules 
For  find 

Solution 
Finding this derivative requires the sum rule, the constant multiple rule, and the product rule. 

EXAMPLE 3.29 

Extending the Product Rule 
For  express  in terms of  and their derivatives. 

Solution 
We can think of the function  as the product of the function  and the function  That is, 

 Thus, 

EXAMPLE 3.30 

Combining the Quotient Rule and the Product Rule 
For  find 

Solution 
This procedure is typical for finding the derivative of a rational function. 

 3.19 Find 



226     3 • Derivatives

EXAMPLE 3.31 

Determining Where a Function Has a Horizontal Tangent 
Determine the values of  for which  has a horizontal tangent line. 

Solution 
To find the values of  for which  has a horizontal tangent line, we must solve  Since 

we must solve  Thus we see that the function has horizontal tangent lines at  and  as 
shown in the following graph. 

Figure 3.19 This function has horizontal tangent lines at x = 2/3 and x = 4. 

EXAMPLE 3.32 

Finding a Velocity 
The position of an object on a coordinate axis at time  is given by  What is the initial velocity of the object? 

Solution 
Since the initial velocity is  begin by finding  by applying the quotient rule: 

After evaluating, we see that 

 3.20 Find the values of  for which the graph of  has a tangent line parallel to the line 

STUDENT PROJECT 

Formula One Grandstands 
Formula One car races can be very exciting to watch and attract a lot of spectators. Formula One track designers have 
to ensure sufficient grandstand space is available around the track to accommodate these viewers. However, car 
racing can be dangerous, and safety considerations are paramount. The grandstands must be placed where 
spectators will not be in danger should a driver lose control of a car (Figure 3.20). 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.3 • Differentiation Rules     227

Figure 3.20 The grandstand next to a straightaway of the Circuit de Barcelona-Catalunya race track, located where 
the spectators are not in danger. 

********** 
Safety is especially a concern on turns. If a driver does not slow down enough before entering the turn, the car may 
slide off the racetrack. Normally, this just results in a wider turn, which slows the driver down. But if the driver loses 
control completely, the car may fly off the track entirely, on a path tangent to the curve of the racetrack. 

Suppose you are designing a new Formula One track. One section of the track can be modeled by the function 
 (Figure 3.21). The current plan calls for grandstands to be built along the first straightaway and 

around a portion of the first curve. The plans call for the front corner of the grandstand to be located at the point 
 We want to determine whether this location puts the spectators in danger if a driver loses control of the 

car. 

Figure 3.21 (a) One section of the racetrack can be modeled by the function  (b) The front 
corner of the grandstand is located at 

1. Physicists have determined that drivers are most likely to lose control of their cars as they are coming into a 
turn, at the point where the slope of the tangent line is 1. Find the  coordinates of this point near the turn. 

2. Find an equation of the tangent line to the curve at this point. 



228     3 • Derivatives

3. To determine whether the spectators are in danger in this scenario, find the x-coordinate of the point where the 
tangent line crosses the line  Is this point safely to the right of the grandstand? Or are the spectators in 
danger? 

4. What if a driver loses control earlier than the physicists project? Suppose a driver loses control at the point 
 What is the slope of the tangent line at this point? 

5. If a driver loses control as described in part 4, are the spectators safe? 
6. Should you proceed with the current design for the grandstand, or should the grandstands be moved? 

 SECTION 3.3 EXERCISES 
For the following exercises, find  for each function. 

106.  107 .  108 . 

109.  110 .  111 . 

112.  113 .  114 . 

115.  116 .  117 . 

For the following exercises, find an equation of the tangent line  to the graph of the given function at the indicated 
point. Use a graphing calculator to graph the function and the tangent line. 

118. [T]  at  119 . [T]  at  120 . [T]  at 

121. [T]  at 

For the following exercises, assume that  and  are both differentiable functions for all  Find the derivative of 
each of the functions 

122.  123 .  124 . 

125. 

For the following exercises, assume that  and  are both differentiable functions with values as given in the 
following table. Use the following table to calculate the following derivatives. 

126. Find  if  127 . Find  if  128 . Find  if 

129. Find  if 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.3 • Differentiation Rules     229

For the following exercises, use the following figure to find the indicated derivatives, if they exist. 

 130 . Let  131 . Let 
Find Find 
a. a. 
b.  and b.  and 
c. c. 

132. Let  Find 
a. 
b.  and 
c. 

For the following exercises, 
a. evaluate  and 
b. graph the function  and the tangent line at 

133. [T]  134 . [T]  135 . [T] 

136. [T]  137 . Find an equation of the  138 . Find an equation of the 
tangent line to the graph of tangent line to the graph 

of  at 
at 

139. Find an equation of the  140 . Find the point on the  141 . Find an equation of the 
tangent line to the graph of graph of  such line passing through the 

that the tangent line at point  and tangent 
at that point has an to the graph of 

intercept of 6. 

142. Determine all points on  143 . Find a quadratic  144 . A car driving along a 
the graph of polynomial such that freeway with traffic has 

 and traveled 
for which 
a. the tangent line is meters in  seconds. 

horizontal a. Determine the time in 
b. the tangent line has a seconds when the 

slope of velocity of the car is 0. 
b. Determine the 

acceleration of the car 
when the velocity is 0. 



230     3 • Derivatives

145. [T] A herring swimming  146 . The population in millions  147 . [T] The concentration of 
along a straight line has of arctic flounder in the antibiotic in the 
traveled  feet Atlantic Ocean is modeled bloodstream  hours after 

by the function being injected is given by 
in  seconds.  where  is the function 
Determine the velocity of 
the herring when it has measured in years.  where  is 
traveled 3 seconds. a. Determine the initial measured in milligrams 

flounder population. per liter of blood. 
b. Determine  and a. Find the rate of 

briefly interpret the change of 
result. b. Determine the rate of 

change for 
 and 

c. Briefly describe what 
seems to be occurring 
as the number of 
hours increases. 

148. A book publisher has a  149 . [T] According to Newton’s 
cost function given by law of universal 

 where x gravitation, the force 
between two bodies of 

is the number of copies of constant mass  and 
a book in thousands and is given by the formula 
C is the cost, per book, 
measured in dollars.  where  is 
Evaluate  and the gravitational constant 
explain its meaning. and  is the distance 

between the bodies. 
a. Suppose that 

 are 
constants. Find the 
rate of change of force 

 with respect to 
distance 

b. Find the rate of 
change of force  with 
gravitational constant 

 on two 
bodies 10 meters 
apart, each with a 
mass of 1000 
kilograms. 

3.4 Derivatives as Rates of Change 
Learning Objectives 

3.4.1 Determine a new value of a quantity from the old value and the amount of change. 
3.4.2 Calculate the average rate of change and explain how it differs from the instantaneous rate of change. 
3.4.3 Apply rates of change to displacement, velocity, and acceleration of an object moving along a straight 

line. 
3.4.4 Predict the future population from the present value and the population growth rate. 
3.4.5 Use derivatives to calculate marginal cost and revenue in a business situation. 

In this section we look at some applications of the derivative by focusing on the interpretation of the derivative as the 
rate of change of a function. These applications include acceleration and velocity in physics, population growth rates 
in biology, and marginal functions in economics. 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.4 • Derivatives as Rates of Change     231

Amount of Change Formula 
One application for derivatives is to estimate an unknown value of a function at a point by using a known value of a 
function at some given point together with its rate of change at the given point. If  is a function defined on an 
interval  then the amount of change of  over the interval is the change in the  values of the function 
over that interval and is given by 

The average rate of change of the function  over that same interval is the ratio of the amount of change over that 
interval to the corresponding change in the  values. It is given by 

As we already know, the instantaneous rate of change of  at  is its derivative 

For small enough values of  We can then solve for  to get the amount of change formula: 

(3.10) 

We can use this formula if we know only  and  and wish to estimate the value of  For example, we 
may use the current population of a city and the rate at which it is growing to estimate its population in the near future. 
As we can see in Figure 3.22, we are approximating  by the  coordinate at  on the line tangent to  at 

 Observe that the accuracy of this estimate depends on the value of  as well as the value of 

Figure 3.22 The new value of a changed quantity equals the original value plus the rate of change times the interval of 
change: 

 MEDIA 

Here is an interesting demonstration (http://www.openstax.org/l/20_chainrule) of rate of change. 

EXAMPLE 3.33 

Estimating the Value of a Function 
If  and  estimate 

Solution 
Begin by finding  We have  Thus, 

 3.21 Given  and  estimate 



232     3 • Derivatives

Motion along a Line 
Another use for the derivative is to analyze motion along a line. We have described velocity as the rate of change of 
position. If we take the derivative of the velocity, we can find the acceleration, or the rate of change of velocity. It is also 
important to introduce the idea of speed, which is the magnitude of velocity. Thus, we can state the following 
mathematical definitions. 

Definition 

Let  be a function giving the position of an object at time 

The velocity of the object at time  is given by 

The speed of the object at time  is given by 

The acceleration of the object at  is given by 

EXAMPLE 3.34 

Comparing Instantaneous Velocity and Average Velocity 
A ball is dropped from a height of 64 feet. Its height above ground (in feet)  seconds later is given by 

a. What is the instantaneous velocity of the ball when it hits the ground? 
b. What is the average velocity during its fall? 

Solution 
The first thing to do is determine how long it takes the ball to reach the ground. To do this, set  Solving 

 we get  so it take 2 seconds for the ball to reach the ground. 
a. The instantaneous velocity of the ball as it strikes the ground is  Since  we obtain 

b. The average velocity of the ball during its fall is 

EXAMPLE 3.35 

Interpreting the Relationship between  and 
A particle moves along a coordinate axis in the positive direction to the right. Its position at time  is given by 

 Find  and  and use these values to answer the following questions. 
a. Is the particle moving from left to right or from right to left at time 
b. Is the particle speeding up or slowing down at time 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.4 • Derivatives as Rates of Change     233

Solution 
Begin by finding  and 

 and 
Evaluating these functions at  we obtain  and 
a. Because  the particle is moving from right to left. 
b. Because  and  velocity and acceleration are acting in opposite directions. In other words, the 

particle is being accelerated in the direction opposite the direction in which it is traveling, causing  to decrease. 
The particle is slowing down. 

EXAMPLE 3.36 

Position and Velocity 
The position of a particle moving along a coordinate axis is given by 
a. Find 
b. At what time(s) is the particle at rest? 
c. On what time intervals is the particle moving from left to right? From right to left? 
d. Use the information obtained to sketch the path of the particle along a coordinate axis. 

Solution 
a. The velocity is the derivative of the position function: 

b. The particle is at rest when  so set  Factoring the left-hand side of the equation 
produces  Solving, we find that the particle is at rest at  and 

c. The particle is moving from left to right when  and from right to left when  Figure 3.23 gives the 
analysis of the sign of  for  but it does not represent the axis along which the particle is moving. 

Figure 3.23 The sign of v(t) determines the direction of the particle. 

Since  on ∞  the particle is moving from left to right on these intervals. 
Since  on  the particle is moving from right to left on this interval. 

d. Before we can sketch the graph of the particle, we need to know its position at the time it starts moving  and 
at the times that it changes direction  We have  and  This means that the 
particle begins on the coordinate axis at 4 and changes direction at 24 and 20 on the coordinate axis. The path of 
the particle is shown on a coordinate axis in Figure 3.24. 

Figure 3.24 The path of the particle can be determined by analyzing v(t). 

 3.22 A particle moves along a coordinate axis. Its position at time  is given by  Is the particle 
moving from right to left or from left to right at time 

Population Change 
In addition to analyzing velocity, speed, acceleration, and position, we can use derivatives to analyze various types of 
populations, including those as diverse as bacteria colonies and cities. We can use a current population, together with a 
growth rate, to estimate the size of a population in the future. The population growth rate is the rate of change of a 
population and consequently can be represented by the derivative of the size of the population. 



234     3 • Derivatives

Definition 

If  is the number of entities present in a population, then the population growth rate of  is defined to be 

EXAMPLE 3.37 

Estimating a Population 
The population of a city is tripling every 5 years. If its current population is 10,000, what will be its approximate 
population 2 years from now? 

Solution 
Let  be the population (in thousands)  years from now. Thus, we know that  and based on the 
information, we anticipate  Now estimate  the current growth rate, using 

By applying Equation 3.10 to  we can estimate the population 2 years from now by writing 

thus, in 2 years the population will be 18,000. 

 3.23 The current population of a mosquito colony is known to be 3,000; that is,  If 
estimate the size of the population in 3 days, where  is measured in days. 

Changes in Cost and Revenue 
In addition to analyzing motion along a line and population growth, derivatives are useful in analyzing changes in cost, 
revenue, and profit. The concept of a marginal function is common in the fields of business and economics and implies 
the use of derivatives. The marginal cost is the derivative of the cost function. The marginal revenue is the derivative of 
the revenue function. The marginal profit is the derivative of the profit function, which is based on the cost function and 
the revenue function. 

Definition 

If  is the cost of producing x items, then the marginal cost  is 

If  is the revenue obtained from selling  items, then the marginal revenue  is 

If  is the profit obtained from selling x items, then the marginal profit  is defined to be 

We can roughly approximate 

by choosing an appropriate value for  Since x represents objects, a reasonable and small value for  is 1. Thus, by 
substituting  we get the approximation  Consequently,  for a given 
value of  can be thought of as the change in cost associated with producing one additional item. In a similar way, 

 approximates the revenue obtained by selling one additional item, and  approximates 
the profit obtained by producing and selling one additional item. 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.4 • Derivatives as Rates of Change     235

EXAMPLE 3.38 

Applying Marginal Revenue 
Assume that the number of barbeque dinners that can be sold,  can be related to the price charged,  by the equation 

In this case, the revenue in dollars obtained by selling  barbeque dinners is given by 

Use the marginal revenue function to estimate the revenue obtained from selling the 101st barbeque dinner. Compare 
this to the actual revenue obtained from the sale of this dinner. 

Solution 
First, find the marginal revenue function: 
Next, use  to approximate  the revenue obtained from the sale of the 101st dinner. Since 

 the revenue obtained from the sale of the 101st dinner is approximately $3. 
The actual revenue obtained from the sale of the 101st dinner is 

The marginal revenue is a fairly good estimate in this case and has the advantage of being easy to compute. 

 3.24 Suppose that the profit obtained from the sale of  fish-fry dinners is given by 
Use the marginal profit function to estimate the profit from the sale of the 101st fish-fry dinner. 

 SECTION 3.4 EXERCISES 
For the following exercises, the given functions represent the position of a particle traveling along a horizontal line; 

. 
a. Find the velocity and acceleration functions. 
b. Determine the time intervals when the object is slowing down or speeding up. 

150.  151 .  152 . 

153. A model rocket is fired  154 . A ball is thrown  155 . The position function 
vertically upward from the downward with a speed 
ground. The distance  in of 8 ft/s from the top of a represents the position of 
feet that the rocket 64-foot-tall building. After the back of a car backing 
travels from the ground t seconds, its height out of a driveway and 
after  seconds is given by above the ground is given then driving in a straight 

by line, where  is in feet and 
a. Find the velocity of the  is in seconds. In this 

rocket 3 seconds after a. Determine how long it case,  represents 
being fired. takes for the ball to hit the time at which the 

b. Find the acceleration the ground. back of the car is at the 
of the rocket 3 b. Determine the velocity garage door, so 
seconds after being of the ball when it hits  is the starting 
fired. the ground. position of the car, 4 feet 

inside the garage. 
a. Determine the velocity 

of the car when 

b. Determine the velocity 
of the car when 



236     3 • Derivatives

156. The position of a  157 . A potato is launched  158 . The position function 
hummingbird flying along vertically upward with an  gives the 
a straight line in  seconds initial velocity of 100 ft/s position in miles of a 
is given by from a potato gun at the freight train where east is 
meters. top of an 85-foot-tall the positive direction and 
a. Determine the velocity building. The position of  is measured in hours. 

of the bird at  sec. the potato relative to the a. Determine the 
b. Determine the ground after  seconds is direction the train is 

acceleration of the bird given by traveling when 
at  sec. 

c. Determine the a. Find the velocity of the b. Determine the 
acceleration of the bird potato after  and direction the train is 
when the velocity traveling when 
equals 0. b. Find the speed of the 

potato at 0.5 s and c. Determine the time 
5.75 s. intervals when the 

c. Determine when the train is slowing down 
potato reaches its or speeding up. 
maximum height. 

d. Find the acceleration 
of the potato at 0.5 s 
and 1.5 s. 

e. Determine how long 
the potato is in the air. 

f. Determine the velocity 
of the potato upon 
hitting the ground. 

159. The following graph shows the  160 . The cost function, in  161 . The price  (in dollars) 
position  of an object moving dollars, of a company that and the demand  for a 
along a straight line. manufactures food certain digital clock radio 

processors is given by is given by the 
price–demand function 

where  is the number of 
food processors a. Find the revenue 
manufactured. function 
a. Find the marginal cost b. Find the marginal 

function. revenue function. 
b. Use the marginal cost c. Find the marginal 

function to estimate revenue at 
the cost of and 
manufacturing the 
thirteenth food 

a. Use the graph of the position processor. 
function to determine the time c. Find the actual cost of 
intervals when the velocity is manufacturing the 
positive, negative, or zero. thirteenth food 

b. Sketch the graph of the velocity processor. 
function. 

c. Use the graph of the velocity 
function to determine the time 
intervals when the acceleration is 
positive, negative, or zero. 

d. Determine the time intervals 
when the object is speeding up or 
slowing down. 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.4 • Derivatives as Rates of Change     237

162. [T] A profit is earned when  163 . [T] In general, the profit  164 . A small town in Ohio 
revenue exceeds cost. function is the difference commissioned an actuarial 
Suppose the profit function between the revenue and firm to conduct a study 
for a skateboard cost functions: that modeled the rate of 
manufacturer is given by change of the town’s 

Suppose the price- population. The study 
where  is the number of demand and cost found that the town’s 
skateboards sold. functions for the population (measured in 
a. Find the exact profit production of cordless thousands of people) can 

from the sale of the drills is given respectively be modeled by the function 
thirtieth skateboard. by  and 

b. Find the marginal profit where  is measured in 
function and use it to where  is the number of years. 
estimate the profit from cordless drills that are a. Find the rate of change 
the sale of the thirtieth sold at a price of  dollars function  of the 
skateboard. per drill and  is the population function. 

cost of producing b. Find 
cordless drills. 
a. Find the marginal cost and  Interpret 

function. what the results mean 
b. Find the revenue and for the town. 

marginal revenue c. Find 
functions. 

c. Find  and and  Interpret 
 Interpret what the results mean 

the results. for the town’s 
d. Find the profit and population. 

marginal profit 
functions. 

e. Find  and 
 Interpret 

the results. 

165. [T] A culture of bacteria grows  166 . The centripetal force of 
in number according to the an object of mass  is 
function given by 

where  is the speed of 
where  is measured in hours. rotation and  is the 
a. Find the rate of change of distance from the center 

the number of bacteria. of rotation. 
b. Find a. Find the rate of 

change of centripetal 
and force with respect to 

c. Interpret the results in (b). the distance from the 
d. Find center of rotation. 

b. Find the rate of 
and  Interpret change of centripetal 
what the answers imply force of an object with 
about the bacteria mass 1000 kilograms, 
population growth. velocity of 13.89 m/s, 

and a distance from 
the center of rotation 
of 200 meters. 



238     3 • Derivatives

The following questions concern the population (in millions) of London by decade in the 19th century, which is listed in 
the following table. 

Years since 1800 Population (millions) 

1 0.8795 

11 1.040 

21 1.264 

31 1.516 

41 1.661 

51 2.000 

61 2.634 

71 3.272 

81 3.911 

91 4.422 

Table 3.4 Population of London Source: 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Demographics_of_London. 

167. [T]  168 . [T] 
a. Using a calculator or a a. Using a calculator or a 

computer program, computer program, 
find the best-fit linear find the best-fit 
function to measure quadratic curve 
the population. through the data. 

b. Find the derivative of b. Find the derivative of 
the equation in a. and the equation and 
explain its physical explain its physical 
meaning. meaning. 

c. Find the second c. Find the second 
derivative of the derivative of the 
equation and explain equation and explain 
its physical meaning. its physical meaning. 

For the following exercises, consider an astronaut on a large planet in another galaxy. To learn more about the 
composition of this planet, the astronaut drops an electronic sensor into a deep trench. The sensor transmits its vertical 
position every second in relation to the astronaut’s position. The summary of the falling sensor data is displayed in the 
following table. 

Time after dropping (s) Position (m) 

0 0 

1 −1 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.4 • Derivatives as Rates of Change     239

Time after dropping (s) Position (m) 

2 −2 

3 −5 

4 −7 

5 −14 

169. [T]  170 . [T] 
a. Using a calculator or a. Using a calculator or 

computer program, computer program, 
find the best-fit find the best-fit cubic 
quadratic curve to the curve to the data. 
data. b. Find the derivative of 

b. Find the derivative of the position function 
the position function and explain its physical 
and explain its physical meaning. 
meaning. c. Find the second 

c. Find the second derivative of the 
derivative of the position function and 
position function and explain its physical 
explain its physical meaning. 
meaning. d. Using the result from 

c. explain why a cubic 
function is not a good 
choice for this 
problem. 



240     3 • Derivatives

The following problems deal with the Holling type I, II, and III equations. These equations describe the ecological event 
of growth of a predator population given the amount of prey available for consumption. 
171. [T] The Holling type I  172 . [T] The Holling type II  173 . [T] The Holling type III 

equation is described by equation is described by equation is described by 
 where  is the  where  is  where  is 

amount of prey available the amount of prey 
and  is the rate at available and  is the the amount of prey 
which the predator meets maximum consumption available and  is the 
the prey for consumption. rate of the predator. maximum consumption 
a. Graph the Holling type a. Graph the Holling type rate of the predator. 

I equation, given II equation given a. Graph the Holling type 
 and III equation given 

b. Determine the first What are the  and 
derivative of the differences between What are the 
Holling type I equation the Holling type I and differences between 
and explain physically II equations? the Holling type II and 
what the derivative b. Take the first III equations? 
implies. derivative of the b. Take the first 

c. Determine the second Holling type II derivative of the 
derivative of the equation and interpret Holling type III 
Holling type I equation the physical meaning equation and interpret 
and explain physically of the derivative. the physical meaning 
what the derivative c. Show that of the derivative. 
implies. c. Find and interpret the 

and interpret the 
d. Using the meaning of the second 

meaning of the 
interpretations from b. derivative (it may help 

parameter 
and c. explain why the to graph the second 

d. Find and interpret the 
Holling type I equation derivative). 

meaning of the second 
may not be realistic. d. What additional 

derivative. What ecological phenomena 
makes the Holling type does the Holling type 
II function more III function describe 
realistic than the compared with the 
Holling type I Holling type II 
function? function? 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.5 • Derivatives of Trigonometric Functions     241

174. [T] The populations of the 
snowshoe hare (in 
thousands) and the lynx (in 
hundreds) collected over 7 
years from 1937 to 1943 are 
shown in the following 
table. The snowshoe hare is 
the primary prey of the lynx. 

Population 
of Population 

snowshoe of lynx 
hare (hundreds) 

(thousands) 

20 10 

55 15 

65 55 

95 60 

Table 3.5 Snowshoe Hare 
and Lynx Populations 
Source: 
http://www.biotopics.co.uk/
newgcse/predatorprey.html. 

a. Graph the data points 
and determine which 
Holling-type function fits 
the data best. 

b. Using the meanings of 
the parameters  and 
determine values for 
those parameters by 
examining a graph of the 
data. Recall that 
measures what prey 
value results in the half-
maximum of the 
predator value. 

c. Plot the resulting Holling-
type I, II, and III 
functions on top of the 
data. Was the result from 
part a. correct? 

3.5 Derivatives of Trigonometric Functions 
Learning Objectives 

3.5.1 Find the derivatives of the sine and cosine function. 
3.5.2 Find the derivatives of the standard trigonometric functions. 
3.5.3 Calculate the higher-order derivatives of the sine and cosine. 

One of the most important types of motion in physics is simple harmonic motion, which is associated with such systems 
as an object with mass oscillating on a spring. Simple harmonic motion can be described by using either sine or cosine 



242     3 • Derivatives

functions. In this section we expand our knowledge of derivative formulas to include derivatives of these and other 
trigonometric functions. We begin with the derivatives of the sine and cosine functions and then use them to obtain 
formulas for the derivatives of the remaining four trigonometric functions. Being able to calculate the derivatives of the 
sine and cosine functions will enable us to find the velocity and acceleration of simple harmonic motion. 

Derivatives of the Sine and Cosine Functions 
We begin our exploration of the derivative for the sine function by using the formula to make a reasonable guess at its 
derivative. Recall that for a function 

Consequently, for values of  very close to 0,  We see that by using 

By setting  and using a graphing utility, we can get a graph of an approximation to the derivative 
of  (Figure 3.25). 

Figure 3.25 The graph of the function  looks a lot like a cosine curve. 
Upon inspection, the graph of  appears to be very close to the graph of the cosine function. Indeed, we will show 
that 

If we were to follow the same steps to approximate the derivative of the cosine function, we would find that 

Theorem 3.8 

The Derivatives of sin x and cos x 
The derivative of the sine function is the cosine and the derivative of the cosine function is the negative sine. 

(3.11) 

(3.12) 

Proof 
Because the proofs for  and  use similar techniques, we provide only the proof for 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.5 • Derivatives of Trigonometric Functions     243

 Before beginning, recall two important trigonometric limits we learned in Introduction to Limits: 

The graphs of  and  are shown in Figure 3.26. 

Figure 3.26 These graphs show two important limits needed to establish the derivative formulas for the sine and cosine 
functions. 
We also recall the following trigonometric identity for the sine of the sum of two angles: 

Now that we have gathered all the necessary equations and identities, we proceed with the proof. 

□ 
Figure 3.27 shows the relationship between the graph of  and its derivative  Notice that at the 
points where  has a horizontal tangent, its derivative  takes on the value zero. We also see that 
where  is increasing,  and where  is decreasing, 



244     3 • Derivatives

Figure 3.27 Where  has a maximum or a minimum,  that is,  where  has a horizontal 
tangent. These points are noted with dots on the graphs. 

EXAMPLE 3.39 

Differentiating a Function Containing sin x 
Find the derivative of 

Solution 
Using the product rule, we have 

After simplifying, we obtain 

 3.25 Find the derivative of 

EXAMPLE 3.40 

Finding the Derivative of a Function Containing cos x 
Find the derivative of 

Solution 
By applying the quotient rule, we have 

Simplifying, we obtain 

 3.26 Find the derivative of 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.5 • Derivatives of Trigonometric Functions     245

EXAMPLE 3.41 

An Application to Velocity 
A particle moves along a coordinate axis in such a way that its position at time  is given by  for 

 At what times is the particle at rest? 

Solution 
To determine when the particle is at rest, set  Begin by finding  We obtain 

so we must solve 

The solutions to this equation are  and  Thus the particle is at rest at times  and 

 3.27 A particle moves along a coordinate axis. Its position at time  is given by  for 
 At what times is the particle at rest? 

Derivatives of Other Trigonometric Functions 
Since the remaining four trigonometric functions may be expressed as quotients involving sine, cosine, or both, we can 
use the quotient rule to find formulas for their derivatives. 

EXAMPLE 3.42 

The Derivative of the Tangent Function 
Find the derivative of 

Solution 
Start by expressing  as the quotient of  and 

Now apply the quotient rule to obtain 

Simplifying, we obtain 

Recognizing that  by the Pythagorean theorem, we now have 

Finally, use the identity  to obtain 

 3.28 Find the derivative of 

The derivatives of the remaining trigonometric functions may be obtained by using similar techniques. We provide these 
formulas in the following theorem. 



246     3 • Derivatives

Theorem 3.9 

Derivatives of  and 
The derivatives of the remaining trigonometric functions are as follows: 

(3.13) 

(3.14) 

(3.15) 

(3.16) 

EXAMPLE 3.43 

Finding the Equation of a Tangent Line 
Find the equation of a line tangent to the graph of  at 

Solution 
To find an equation of the tangent line, we need a point and a slope at that point. To find the point, compute 

Thus the tangent line passes through the point  Next, find the slope by finding the derivative of  and 
evaluating it at 

Using the point-slope equation of the line, we obtain 

or equivalently, 

EXAMPLE 3.44 

Finding the Derivative of Trigonometric Functions 
Find the derivative of 

Solution 
To find this derivative, we must use both the sum rule and the product rule. Using the sum rule, we find 

In the first term,  and by applying the product rule to the second term we obtain 

Therefore, we have 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.5 • Derivatives of Trigonometric Functions     247

 3.29 Find the derivative of 

 3.30 Find the slope of the line tangent to the graph of  at 

Higher-Order Derivatives 
The higher-order derivatives of  and  follow a repeating pattern. By following the pattern, we can find any 
higher-order derivative of  and 

EXAMPLE 3.45 

Finding Higher-Order Derivatives of 
Find the first four derivatives of 

Solution 
Each step in the chain is straightforward: 

Analysis 
Once we recognize the pattern of derivatives, we can find any higher-order derivative by determining the step in the 
pattern to which it corresponds. For example, every fourth derivative of sin x equals sin x, so 

 3.31 For  find 

EXAMPLE 3.46 

Using the Pattern for Higher-Order Derivatives of 
Find 

Solution 
We can see right away that for the 74th derivative of  so 

 3.32 For  find 



248     3 • Derivatives

EXAMPLE 3.47 

An Application to Acceleration 
A particle moves along a coordinate axis in such a way that its position at time  is given by  Find 
and  Compare these values and decide whether the particle is speeding up or slowing down. 

Solution 
First find 

Thus, 

Next, find  Thus,  and we have 

Since  and  we see that velocity and acceleration are acting in opposite directions; 

that is, the object is being accelerated in the direction opposite to the direction in which it is travelling. Consequently, the 
particle is slowing down. 

 3.33 A block attached to a spring is moving vertically. Its position at time  is given by  Find 
and  Compare these values and decide whether the block is speeding up or slowing down. 

 SECTION 3.5 EXERCISES 
For the following exercises, find  for the given functions. 

175.  176 .  177 . 

178.  179 .  180 . 

181.  182 .  183 . 

184. 

For the following exercises, find an equation of the tangent line to each of the given functions at the indicated values of 
 Then use a calculator to graph both the function and the tangent line to ensure the equation for the tangent line is 

correct. 
185. [T]  186 . [T]  187 . [T] 

188. [T]  189 . [T]  190 . [T] 

For the following exercises, find  for the given functions. 

191.  192 .  193 . 

194.  195 .  196 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.5 • Derivatives of Trigonometric Functions     249

197. Find all  values on the  198 . Find all  values on the  199 . Let 
graph of graph of Determine the points on 

 for the graph of  for 
where the tangent line is  where the  where the 
horizontal. tangent line has slope 2. tangent line(s) is (are) 

parallel to the line 

200. [T] A mass on a spring  201 . Let the position of a  202 . After a diver jumps off a 
bounces up and down in swinging pendulum in diving board, the edge of 
simple harmonic motion, simple harmonic motion the board oscillates with 
modeled by the function be given by position given by 

 where  is  cm at 
measured in inches and where  and  are seconds after the jump. 
is measured in seconds. constants,  measures a. Sketch one period of 
Find the rate at which the time in seconds, and the position function 
spring is oscillating at measures position in for 

 s. centimeters. If the b. Find the velocity 
position is 0 cm and the function. 
velocity is 3 cm/s when c. Sketch one period of 

, find the values of the velocity function 
and . for 

d. Determine the times 
when the velocity is 0 
over one period. 

e. Find the acceleration 
function. 

f. Sketch one period of 
the acceleration 
function for 

203. The number of  204 . [T] The amount of rainfall 
hamburgers sold at a per month in Phoenix, 
fast-food restaurant in Arizona, can be 
Pasadena, California, is approximated by 
given by 
where  is the number of where  is months since 
hamburgers sold and January. Find  and use a 
represents the number of calculator to determine 
hours after the restaurant the intervals where the 
opened at 11 a.m. until 11 amount of rain falling is 
p.m., when the store decreasing. 
closes. Find  and 
determine the intervals 
where the number of 
burgers being sold is 
increasing. 

For the following exercises, use the quotient rule to derive the given equations. 

205.  206 .  207 . 

208. Use the definition of derivative and 
the identity 

to prove that 



250     3 • Derivatives

For the following exercises, find the requested higher-order derivative for the given functions. 

209.  of  210 .  of  211 .  of 

212.  of  213 .  of 

3.6 The Chain Rule 
Learning Objectives 

3.6.1 State the chain rule for the composition of two functions. 
3.6.2 Apply the chain rule together with the power rule. 
3.6.3 Apply the chain rule and the product/quotient rules correctly in combination when both are necessary. 
3.6.4 Recognize the chain rule for a composition of three or more functions. 
3.6.5 Describe the proof of the chain rule. 

We have seen the techniques for differentiating basic functions  as well as sums, differences, 
products, quotients, and constant multiples of these functions. However, these techniques do not allow us to 
differentiate compositions of functions, such as  or  In this section, we study the rule 
for finding the derivative of the composition of two or more functions. 

Deriving the Chain Rule 
When we have a function that is a composition of two or more functions, we could use all of the techniques we have 
already learned to differentiate it. However, using all of those techniques to break down a function into simpler parts that 
we are able to differentiate can get cumbersome. Instead, we use the chain rule, which states that the derivative of a 
composite function is the derivative of the outer function evaluated at the inner function times the derivative of the 
inner function. 

To put this rule into context, let’s take a look at an example:  We can think of the derivative of this 
function with respect to x as the rate of change of  relative to the change in  Consequently, we want to know 
how  changes as  changes. We can think of this event as a chain reaction: As  changes,  changes, which 
leads to a change in  This chain reaction gives us hints as to what is involved in computing the derivative of 

 First of all, a change in  forcing a change in  suggests that somehow the derivative of  is involved. In 
addition, the change in  forcing a change in  suggests that the derivative of  with respect to  where 

 is also part of the final derivative. 

We can take a more formal look at the derivative of  by setting up the limit that would give us the 
derivative at a specific value  in the domain of 

This expression does not seem particularly helpful; however, we can modify it by multiplying and dividing by the 
expression  to obtain 

From the definition of the derivative, we can see that the second factor is the derivative of  at  That is, 

However, it might be a little more challenging to recognize that the first term is also a derivative. We can see this by 
letting  and observing that as 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.6 • The Chain Rule     251

Thus, 

In other words, if  then  Thus, if we think of  as the composition 
 where  sin  and  then the derivative of  is the product of the 

derivative of  and the derivative of the function  evaluated at the function  At this point, 
we anticipate that for  it is quite likely that  As we determined above, this is the 
case for 

Now that we have derived a special case of the chain rule, we state the general case and then apply it in a general form 
to other composite functions. An informal proof is provided at the end of the section. 

Rule: The Chain Rule 

Let  and  be functions. For all x in the domain of  for which  is differentiable at x and  is differentiable at 
the derivative of the composite function 

is given by 

(3.17) 

Alternatively, if  is a function of  and  is a function of  then 

 MEDIA 

Watch an animation (http://www.openstax.org/l/20_chainrule2) of the chain rule. 

Problem-Solving Strategy 

Applying the Chain Rule 
1. To differentiate  begin by identifying  and 
2. Find  and evaluate it at  to obtain 
3. Find 
4. Write 

Note: When applying the chain rule to the composition of two or more functions, keep in mind that we work our way 
from the outside function in. It is also useful to remember that the derivative of the composition of two functions can 
be thought of as having two parts; the derivative of the composition of three functions has three parts; and so on. 
Also, remember that we never evaluate a derivative at a derivative. 

The Chain and Power Rules Combined 
We can now apply the chain rule to composite functions, but note that we often need to use it with other rules. For 
example, to find derivatives of functions of the form  we need to use the chain rule combined with the 
power rule. To do so, we can think of  as  where  Then  Thus, 

 This leads us to the derivative of a power function using the chain rule, 

Rule: Power Rule for Composition of Functions 

For all values of x for which the derivative is defined, if 



252     3 • Derivatives

Then 

(3.18) 

EXAMPLE 3.48 

Using the Chain and Power Rules 
Find the derivative of 

Solution 
First, rewrite 

Applying the power rule with  we have 

Rewriting back to the original form gives us 

 3.34 Find the derivative of 

EXAMPLE 3.49 

Using the Chain and Power Rules with a Trigonometric Function 
Find the derivative of 

Solution 
First recall that  so we can rewrite  as 
Applying the power rule with  we obtain 

EXAMPLE 3.50 

Finding the Equation of a Tangent Line 
Find the equation of a line tangent to the graph of  at 

Solution 
Because we are finding an equation of a line, we need a point. The x-coordinate of the point is 2. To find the 
y-coordinate, substitute 2 into  Since  the point is 

For the slope, we need  To find  first we rewrite  and apply the power rule to obtain 

By substituting, we have  Therefore, the line has equation  Rewriting, 
the equation of the line is 

 3.35 Find an equation of the line tangent to the graph of  at 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.6 • The Chain Rule     253

Combining the Chain Rule with Other Rules 
Now that we can combine the chain rule and the power rule, we examine how to combine the chain rule with the other 
rules we have learned. In particular, we can use it with the formulas for the derivatives of trigonometric functions or with 
the product rule. 

EXAMPLE 3.51 

Using the Chain Rule on a General Cosine Function 
Find the derivative of 

Solution 
Think of  as  where  Since  we have  Then 
we do the following calculation. 

Thus, the derivative of  is given by 

In the following example we apply the rule that we have just derived. 

EXAMPLE 3.52 

Using the Chain Rule on a Cosine Function 
Find the derivative of 

Solution 
Let  Then  Using the result from the previous example, 

EXAMPLE 3.53 

Using the Chain Rule on Another Trigonometric Function 
Find the derivative of 

Solution 
Apply the chain rule to  to obtain 

In this problem,  so we have  Therefore, we obtain 

 3.36 Find the derivative of 

At this point we provide a list of derivative formulas that may be obtained by applying the chain rule in conjunction with 
the formulas for derivatives of trigonometric functions. Their derivations are similar to those used in Example 3.51 and 
Example 3.53. For convenience, formulas are also given in Leibniz’s notation, which some students find easier to 
remember. (We discuss the chain rule using Leibniz’s notation at the end of this section.) It is not absolutely necessary to 
memorize these as separate formulas as they are all applications of the chain rule to previously learned formulas. 



254     3 • Derivatives

Theorem 3.10 

Using the Chain Rule with Trigonometric Functions 
For all values of  for which the derivative is defined, 

EXAMPLE 3.54 

Combining the Chain Rule with the Product Rule 
Find the derivative of 

Solution 
First apply the product rule, then apply the chain rule to each term of the product. 

 3.37 Find the derivative of 

Composites of Three or More Functions 
We can now combine the chain rule with other rules for differentiating functions, but when we are differentiating the 
composition of three or more functions, we need to apply the chain rule more than once. If we look at this situation in 
general terms, we can generate a formula, but we do not need to remember it, as we can simply apply the chain rule 
multiple times. 
In general terms, first we let 

Then, applying the chain rule once we obtain 

Applying the chain rule again, we obtain 

Rule: Chain Rule for a Composition of Three Functions 

For all values of x for which the function is differentiable, if 

then 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.6 • The Chain Rule     255

In other words, we are applying the chain rule twice. 

Notice that the derivative of the composition of three functions has three parts. (Similarly, the derivative of the 
composition of four functions has four parts, and so on.) Also, remember, we can always work from the outside in, taking 
one derivative at a time. 

EXAMPLE 3.55 

Differentiating a Composite of Three Functions 
Find the derivative of 

Solution 
First, rewrite  as 

Then apply the power rule several times. 

 3.38 Find the derivative of 

EXAMPLE 3.56 

Using the Chain Rule in a Velocity Problem 
A particle moves along a coordinate axis. Its position at time t is given by  What is the velocity 
of the particle at time 

Solution 
To find  the velocity of the particle at time  we must differentiate  Thus, 

Substituting  into  we obtain 

 3.39 A particle moves along a coordinate axis. Its position at time  is given by  Find its 
acceleration at time 

Proof 
At this point, we present a very informal proof of the chain rule. For simplicity’s sake we ignore certain issues: For 
example, we assume that  for  in some open interval containing  We begin by applying the limit 
definition of the derivative to the function  to obtain 

Rewriting, we obtain 



256     3 • Derivatives

Although it is clear that 

it is not obvious that 

To see that this is true, first recall that since g is differentiable at  is also continuous at  Thus, 

Next, make the substitution  and  and use change of variables in the limit to obtain 

Finally, 

□ 

EXAMPLE 3.57 

Using the Chain Rule with Functional Values 
Let  If  and  find 

Solution 
Use the chain rule, then substitute. 

 3.40 Given  If  and  find 

The Chain Rule Using Leibniz’s Notation 
As with other derivatives that we have seen, we can express the chain rule using Leibniz’s notation. This notation for the 
chain rule is used heavily in physics applications. 

 let  and  Thus, 

Consequently, 

Rule: Chain Rule Using Leibniz’s Notation 

If  is a function of  and  is a function of  then 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.6 • The Chain Rule     257

EXAMPLE 3.58 

Taking a Derivative Using Leibniz’s Notation, Example 1 
Find the derivative of 

Solution 
First, let  Thus,  Next, find  and  Using the quotient rule, 

and 

Finally, we put it all together. 

It is important to remember that, when using the Leibniz form of the chain rule, the final answer must be expressed 
entirely in terms of the original variable given in the problem. 

EXAMPLE 3.59 

Taking a Derivative Using Leibniz’s Notation, Example 2 
Find the derivative of 

Solution 
First, let  Then  Next, find  and 

Finally, we put it all together. 

 3.41 Use Leibniz’s notation to find the derivative of  Make sure that the final answer is expressed 
entirely in terms of the variable 

 SECTION 3.6 EXERCISES 
For the following exercises, given  and  find  by using Leibniz’s notation for the chain rule: 

214.  215 .  216 . 



258     3 • Derivatives

217.  218 .  219 . 

For each of the following exercises, 
a. decompose each function in the form  and  and 
b. find  as a function of 

220.  221 .  222 . 

223.  224 .  225 . 

226.  227 . 

For the following exercises, find  for each function. 

228.  229 .  230 . 

231.  232 .  233 . 

234.  235 .  236 . 

237.  238 . Let  and  239 . Let 
suppose that and suppose that 
and  for  and 
Find when  Find 

240. Let  and  241 . [T] Find an equation of  242 . [T] Find an equation of 
 If the tangent line to the tangent line to 

and  when  at the  at the 
find origin. Use a calculator to point  Use a 

graph the function and calculator to graph the 
the tangent line together. function and the tangent 

line together. 
243. Find the -coordinates at  244 . [T] Find an equation of 

which the tangent line to the line that is normal to 
 is  at the 

horizontal. point  Use a 
calculator to graph the 
function and the normal 
line together. 

For the following exercises, use the information in the following table to find  at the given value for 

0 2 5 0 2 

1 1 −2 3 0 

2 4 4 1 −1 

3 3 −3 2 3 

245.  246 .  247 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.7 • Derivatives of Inverse Functions     259

248.  249 .  250 . 

251.  252 .  253 . [T] The position function 
of a freight train is given 
by 
with  in meters and  in 
seconds. At time  s, 
find the train’s 
a. velocity and 
b. acceleration. 
c. Using a. and b. is the 

train speeding up or 
slowing down? 

254. [T] A mass hanging from  255 . [T] The total cost to produce  boxes  256 . [T] The formula for the 
a vertical spring is in of Thin Mint Girl Scout cookies is area of a circle is 
simple harmonic motion dollars, where where  is the radius of 
as given by the following the circle. Suppose a circle 
position function, where In  weeks production is estimated is expanding, meaning 
is measured in seconds to be  boxes. that both the area  and 
and  is in inches: a. Find the marginal cost the radius  (in inches) are 

b. Use Leibniz’s notation for the expanding. 
a. Determine the chain rule,  to find a. Suppose 

position of the spring the rate with respect to time  where 
at  s. that the cost is changing. is time in seconds. Use 

b. Find the velocity of the c. Use b. to determine how fast the chain rule 
spring at  s. costs are increasing when  to find 

weeks. Include units with the 
answer. the rate at which the 

area is expanding. 
b. Use a. to find the rate 

at which the area is 
expanding at  s. 

257. [T] The formula for the  258 . [T] The daily temperature in  259 . [T] The depth (in feet) of 
volume of a sphere is degrees Fahrenheit of Phoenix water at a dock changes 

 where  (in in the summer can be modeled with the rise and fall of 
feet) is the radius of the by the function tides. The depth is modeled 
sphere. Suppose a by the function 
spherical snowball is where  is hours after midnight. 
melting in the sun. Find the rate at which the where  is the number of 
a. Suppose temperature is changing at 4 hours after midnight. Find 

 where p.m. the rate at which the depth 
is changing at 6 a.m. 

 is time in minutes. 
Use the chain rule 

 to find 
the rate at which the 
snowball is melting. 

b. Use a. to find the rate 
at which the volume is 
changing at  min. 

3.7 Derivatives of Inverse Functions 
Learning Objectives 

3.7.1 Calculate the derivative of an inverse function. 
3.7.2 Recognize the derivatives of the standard inverse trigonometric functions. 



260     3 • Derivatives

In this section we explore the relationship between the derivative of a function and the derivative of its inverse. For 
functions whose derivatives we already know, we can use this relationship to find derivatives of inverses without having 
to use the limit definition of the derivative. In particular, we will apply the formula for derivatives of inverse functions to 
trigonometric functions. This formula may also be used to extend the power rule to rational exponents. 

The Derivative of an Inverse Function 
We begin by considering a function and its inverse. If  is both invertible and differentiable, it seems reasonable that 
the inverse of  is also differentiable. Figure 3.28 shows the relationship between a function  and its inverse 

 Look at the point  on the graph of  having a tangent line with a slope of  This 
point corresponds to a point  on the graph of  having a tangent line with a slope of 
Thus, if  is differentiable at  then it must be the case that 

Figure 3.28 The tangent lines of a function and its inverse are related; so, too, are the derivatives of these functions. 

We may also derive the formula for the derivative of the inverse by first recalling that  Then by 
differentiating both sides of this equation (using the chain rule on the right), we obtain 

Solving for  we obtain 

(3.19) 

We summarize this result in the following theorem. 

Theorem 3.11 

Inverse Function Theorem 
Let  be a function that is both invertible and differentiable. Let  be the inverse of  For all 
satisfying 

Alternatively, if  is the inverse of  then 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.7 • Derivatives of Inverse Functions     261

EXAMPLE 3.60 

Applying the Inverse Function Theorem 
Use the inverse function theorem to find the derivative of  Compare the resulting derivative to that obtained 
by differentiating the function directly. 

Solution 
The inverse of  is  Since  begin by finding  Thus, 

Finally, 

We can verify that this is the correct derivative by applying the quotient rule to  to obtain 

 3.42 Use the inverse function theorem to find the derivative of  Compare the result obtained by 
differentiating  directly. 

EXAMPLE 3.61 

Applying the Inverse Function Theorem 
Use the inverse function theorem to find the derivative of 

Solution 
The function  is the inverse of the function  Since  begin by finding  Thus, 

Finally, 

 3.43 Find the derivative of  by applying the inverse function theorem. 

From the previous example, we see that we can use the inverse function theorem to extend the power rule to exponents 
of the form  where  is a positive integer. This extension will ultimately allow us to differentiate  where  is any 
rational number. 

Theorem 3.12 

Extending the Power Rule to Rational Exponents 
The power rule may be extended to rational exponents. That is, if  is a positive integer, then 

(3.20) 

Also, if  is a positive integer and  is an arbitrary integer, then 



262     3 • Derivatives

(3.21) 

Proof 
The function  is the inverse of the function  Since  begin by finding  Thus, 

Finally, 

To differentiate  we must rewrite it as  and apply the chain rule. Thus, 

□ 

EXAMPLE 3.62 

Applying the Power Rule to a Rational Power 
Find an equation of the line tangent to the graph of  at 

Solution 
First find  and evaluate it at  Since 

the slope of the tangent line to the graph at  is 

Substituting  into the original function, we obtain  Thus, the tangent line passes through the point 
Substituting into the point-slope formula for a line, we obtain the tangent line 

 3.44 Find the derivative of 

Derivatives of Inverse Trigonometric Functions 
We now turn our attention to finding derivatives of inverse trigonometric functions. These derivatives will prove 
invaluable in the study of integration later in this text. The derivatives of inverse trigonometric functions are quite 
surprising in that their derivatives are actually algebraic functions. Previously, derivatives of algebraic functions have 
proven to be algebraic functions and derivatives of trigonometric functions have been shown to be trigonometric 
functions. Here, for the first time, we see that the derivative of a function need not be of the same type as the original 
function. 

EXAMPLE 3.63 

Derivative of the Inverse Sine Function 
Use the inverse function theorem to find the derivative of 

Solution 
Since for  in the interval  is the inverse of  begin by finding  Since 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.7 • Derivatives of Inverse Functions     263

we see that 

Analysis 
To see that  consider the following argument. Set  In this case,  where 

 We begin by considering the case where  Since  is an acute angle, we may construct a right 
triangle having acute angle  a hypotenuse of length  and the side opposite angle  having length  From the 
Pythagorean theorem, the side adjacent to angle  has length  This triangle is shown in Figure 3.29. Using the 
triangle, we see that 

Figure 3.29 Using a right triangle having acute angle  a hypotenuse of length  and the side opposite angle  having 
length  we can see that 

In the case where  we make the observation that  and hence 

Now if  or  or  and since in either case  and  we have 

Finally, if ,  and . 

Consequently, in all cases, 

EXAMPLE 3.64 

Applying the Chain Rule to the Inverse Sine Function 
Apply the chain rule to the formula derived in Example 3.61 to find the derivative of  and use this 
result to find the derivative of 

Solution 
Applying the chain rule to  we have 

Now let  so  Substituting into the previous result, we obtain 

 3.45 Use the inverse function theorem to find the derivative of 

The derivatives of the remaining inverse trigonometric functions may also be found by using the inverse function 
theorem. These formulas are provided in the following theorem. 



264     3 • Derivatives

Theorem 3.13 

Derivatives of Inverse Trigonometric Functions 

(3.22) 

(3.23) 

(3.24) 

(3.25) 

(3.26) 

(3.27) 

EXAMPLE 3.65 

Applying Differentiation Formulas to an Inverse Tangent Function 
Find the derivative of 

Solution 
Let  so  Substituting into Equation 3.24, we obtain 

Simplifying, we have 

EXAMPLE 3.66 

Applying Differentiation Formulas to an Inverse Sine Function 
Find the derivative of 

Solution 
By applying the product rule, we have 

 3.46 Find the derivative of 

EXAMPLE 3.67 

Applying the Inverse Tangent Function 
The position of a particle at time  is given by  for  Find the velocity of the particle at time 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.7 • Derivatives of Inverse Functions     265

Solution 
Begin by differentiating  in order to find  Thus, 

Simplifying, we have 

Thus, 

 3.47 Find an equation of the line tangent to the graph of  at 

 SECTION 3.7 EXERCISES 
For the following exercises, use the graph of  to 

a. sketch the graph of  and 
b. use part a. to estimate 

260.  261 . 

262.  263 . 

For the following exercises, use the functions  to find 

a.  at  and 
b. 
c. Then use part b. to find  at 

264.  265 .  266 . 



266     3 • Derivatives

267. 

For each of the following functions, find 

268.  269 .  270 . 

271.  272 . 

273. 

For each of the given functions 

a. find the slope of the tangent line to its inverse function  at the indicated point  and 
b. find an equation of the tangent line to the graph of  at the indicated point. 

274.  275 .  276 . 

277.  278 . 

For the following exercises, find  for the given function. 

279.  280 .  281 . 

282.  283 .  284 . 

285.  286 .  287 . 

288. 

For the following exercises, use the given values to find 

289.  290 .  291 . 

292.  293 . 

294.  295 . [T] The position of a  296 . [T] A building that is 225 feet tall 
moving hockey puck after casts a shadow of various lengths 
 seconds is as the day goes by. An angle of 

where  is in meters. elevation  is formed by lines from 
a. Find the velocity of the the top and bottom of the building to 

hockey puck at any the tip of the shadow, as seen in the 
time following figure. Find the rate of 

b. Find the acceleration change of the angle of elevation 
of the puck at any time when  feet. 

c. Evaluate a. and b. for 
 and 

seconds. 
d. What conclusion can 

be drawn from the 
results in c.? 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.7 • Derivatives of Inverse Functions     267

297. [T] A pole stands 75 feet tall.  298 . [T] A television camera at ground 
An angle  is formed when level is 2000 feet away from the 
wires of various lengths of launching pad of a space rocket that 
feet are attached from the is set to take off vertically, as seen in 
ground to the top of the pole, the following figure. The angle of 
as shown in the following elevation of the camera can be found 
figure. Find the rate of change by  where  is the 
of the angle  when a wire height of the rocket. Find the rate of 
of length 90 feet is attached. change of the angle of elevation after 

launch when the camera and the 
rocket are 5000 feet apart. 

299. [T] A local movie theater with a 
30-foot-high screen that is 10 feet 
above a person’s eye level when 
seated has a viewing angle  (in 
radians) given by 

where  is the distance in feet away 
from the movie screen that the 
person is sitting, as shown in the 
following figure. 

a. Find 
b. Evaluate  for  and 

20. 
c. Interpret the results in b.. 
d. Evaluate  for 

and 40 
e. Interpret the results in d. At what 

distance  should the person sit to 
maximize his or her viewing 
angle? 



268     3 • Derivatives

3.8 Implicit Differentiation 
Learning Objectives 

3.8.1 Find the derivative of a complicated function by using implicit differentiation. 
3.8.2 Use implicit differentiation to determine the equation of a tangent line. 

We have already studied how to find equations of tangent lines to functions and the rate of change of a function at a 
specific point. In all these cases we had the explicit equation for the function and differentiated these functions explicitly. 
Suppose instead that we want to determine the equation of a tangent line to an arbitrary curve or the rate of change of 
an arbitrary curve at a point. In this section, we solve these problems by finding the derivatives of functions that define 
implicitly in terms of 

Implicit Differentiation 
In most discussions of math, if the dependent variable  is a function of the independent variable  we express y in 
terms of  If this is the case, we say that  is an explicit function of  For example, when we write the equation 

 we are defining y explicitly in terms of  On the other hand, if the relationship between the function  and 
the variable  is expressed by an equation where  is not expressed entirely in terms of  we say that the equation 
defines y implicitly in terms of  For example, the equation  defines the function  implicitly. 
Implicit differentiation allows us to find slopes of tangents to curves that are clearly not functions (they fail the vertical 
line test). We are using the idea that portions of  are functions that satisfy the given equation, but that  is not actually a 
function of 
In general, an equation defines a function implicitly if the function satisfies that equation. An equation may define many 
different functions implicitly. For example, the functions 

 and  which are illustrated in Figure 3.30, are just 

three of the many functions defined implicitly by the equation 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.8 • Implicit Differentiation     269

Figure 3.30 The equation  defines many functions implicitly. 

If we want to find the slope of the line tangent to the graph of  at the point  we could evaluate the 
derivative of the function  at  On the other hand, if we want the slope of the tangent line at the point 

 we could use the derivative of  However, it is not always easy to solve for a function defined 
implicitly by an equation. Fortunately, the technique of implicit differentiation allows us to find the derivative of an 
implicitly defined function without ever solving for the function explicitly. The process of finding  using implicit 
differentiation is described in the following problem-solving strategy. 

Problem-Solving Strategy 

Implicit Differentiation 
To perform implicit differentiation on an equation that defines a function  implicitly in terms of a variable  use the 
following steps: 

1. Take the derivative of both sides of the equation. Keep in mind that y is a function of x. Consequently, whereas 



270     3 • Derivatives

 because we must use the chain rule to differentiate  with respect to 
2. Rewrite the equation so that all terms containing  are on the left and all terms that do not contain  are on 

the right. 
3. Factor out  on the left. 
4. Solve for  by dividing both sides of the equation by an appropriate algebraic expression. 

EXAMPLE 3.68 

Using Implicit Differentiation 
Assuming that  is defined implicitly by the equation  find 

Solution 
Follow the steps in the problem-solving strategy. 

Analysis 
Note that the resulting expression for  is in terms of both the independent variable  and the dependent variable 
Although in some cases it may be possible to express  in terms of  only, it is generally not possible to do so. 

EXAMPLE 3.69 

Using Implicit Differentiation and the Product Rule 
Assuming that  is defined implicitly by the equation  find 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.8 • Implicit Differentiation     271

Solution 

EXAMPLE 3.70 

Using Implicit Differentiation to Find a Second Derivative 
Find  if 

Solution 
In Example 3.68, we showed that  We can take the derivative of both sides of this equation to find 

At this point we have found an expression for  If we choose, we can simplify the expression further by recalling that 

 and making this substitution in the numerator to obtain 

 3.48 Find  for  defined implicitly by the equation 

Finding Tangent Lines Implicitly 
Now that we have seen the technique of implicit differentiation, we can apply it to the problem of finding equations of 
tangent lines to curves described by equations. 



272     3 • Derivatives

EXAMPLE 3.71 

Finding a Tangent Line to a Circle 
Find an equation of the line tangent to the curve  at the point 

Solution 
Although we could find this equation without using implicit differentiation, using that method makes it much easier. In 
Example 3.68, we found 

The slope of the tangent line is found by substituting  into this expression. Consequently, the slope of the tangent 

line is 

Using the point  and the slope  in the point-slope equation of the line, we obtain the equation 
(Figure 3.31). 

Figure 3.31 The line  is tangent to  at the point (3, −4). 

EXAMPLE 3.72 

Finding the Equation of the Tangent Line to a Curve 
Find an equation of the line tangent to the graph of  at the point  (Figure 3.32). This curve is 
known as the folium (or leaf) of Descartes. 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.8 • Implicit Differentiation     273

Figure 3.32 Finding the tangent line to the folium of Descartes at 

Solution 
Begin by finding 

Next, substitute  into  to find the slope of the tangent line: 

Finally, substitute into the point-slope equation of the line to obtain 

EXAMPLE 3.73 

Applying Implicit Differentiation 
In a simple video game, a rocket travels in an elliptical orbit whose path is described by the equation 
The rocket can fire missiles along lines tangent to its path. The object of the game is to destroy an incoming asteroid 
traveling along the positive x-axis toward  If the rocket fires a missile when it is located at  where will it 
intersect the x-axis? 

Solution 
To solve this problem, we must determine where the line tangent to the graph of 

 at  intersects the x-axis. Begin by finding  implicitly. 

Differentiating, we have 

Solving for  we have 



274     3 • Derivatives

The slope of the tangent line is  The equation of the tangent line is  To determine where 

the line intersects the x-axis, solve  The solution is  The missile intersects the x-axis at the point 

 3.49 Find an equation of the line tangent to the hyperbola  at the point 

 SECTION 3.8 EXERCISES 
For the following exercises, use implicit differentiation to find 

300.  301 .  302 . 

303.  304 .  305 . 

306.  307 .  308 . 

309. 

For the following exercises, find an equation of the tangent line to the graph of the given equation at the indicated point. 
Use a calculator or computer software to graph the function and the tangent line. 
310. [T]  311 . [T]  312 . [T] 

313. [T]  314 . [T]  315 . [T] 

316. [T] The graph of a folium of Descart e3s1 7 . For the equation  318 . Find all points on the 
with equation  is graph of 
given in the following graph. a. Find an equation of  at 

the normal to the which the tangent line is 
tangent line at the vertical. 
point 

b. At what other point 
does the normal line in 
a. intersect the graph 
of the equation? 

a. Find an equation of the tangent 
line at the point  Graph the 
tangent line along with the folium. 

b. Find an equation of the normal 
line to the tangent line in a. at the 
point 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.9 • Derivatives of Exponential and Logarithmic Functions     275

319. For the equation  320 . Find an equation of the  321 . Find an equation of the 
tangent line to the graph tangent line to the graph 

a. Find the -intercept(s). of the equation of the equation 
b. Find the slope of the  at  at 

tangent line(s) at the the point the point 
x-intercept(s). 

c. What does the value(s) 
in b. indicate about the 
tangent line(s)? 

322. Find  and  for  323 . [T] The number of cell  324 . [T] The number of cars 
phones produced when produced when  dollars 
dollars is spent on labor is spent on labor and 
and  dollars is spent on dollars is spent on capital 
capital invested by a invested by a 
manufacturer can be manufacturer can be 
modeled by the equation modeled by the equation 

a. Find  and evaluate (Both  and  are 
at the point measured in thousands of 

b. Interpret the result of dollars.) 
a. a. Find  and evaluate 

at the point 
b. Interpret the result of 

a. 

325. The volume of a right 
circular cone of radius 
and height  is given by 

 Suppose 
that the volume of the 
cone is a constant. Find 

 when  and 

For the following exercises, consider a closed rectangular box with a square base with side  and height 
326. Find an equation for the  327 . If the surface area of the 

surface area of the rectangular box is 78 
rectangular box, square feet, find  when 

 feet and  feet. 

For the following exercises, use implicit differentiation to determine  Does the answer agree with the formulas we 
have previously determined? 
328.  329 .  330 . 

3.9 Derivatives of Exponential and Logarithmic Functions 
Learning Objectives 

3.9.1 Find the derivative of exponential functions. 
3.9.2 Find the derivative of logarithmic functions. 
3.9.3 Use logarithmic differentiation to determine the derivative of a function. 

So far, we have learned how to differentiate a variety of functions, including trigonometric, inverse, and implicit 
functions. In this section, we explore derivatives of exponential and logarithmic functions. As we discussed in 
Introduction to Functions and Graphs, exponential functions play an important role in modeling population growth and 
the decay of radioactive materials. Logarithmic functions can help rescale large quantities and are particularly helpful for 
rewriting complicated expressions. 



276     3 • Derivatives

Derivative of the Exponential Function 
Just as when we found the derivatives of other functions, we can find the derivatives of exponential and logarithmic 
functions using formulas. As we develop these formulas, we need to make certain basic assumptions. The proofs that 
these assumptions hold are beyond the scope of this course. 
First of all, we begin with the assumption that the function  is defined for every real number and is 
continuous. In previous courses, the values of exponential functions for all rational numbers were defined—beginning 
with the definition of  where  is a positive integer—as the product of  multiplied by itself  times. Later, we defined 

 for a positive integer  and  for positive integers  and  These definitions leave open 
the question of the value of  where  is an arbitrary real number. By assuming the continuity of  we 
may interpret  as  where the values of  as we take the limit are rational. For example, we may view  as the 
number satisfying 

As we see in the following table, 

64 77.8802710486 

73.5166947198 77.8810268071 

77.7084726013 77.9242251944 

77.8162741237 78.7932424541 

77.8702309526 84.4485062895 

77.8799471543 256 

Table 3.6 Approximating a Value of 

We also assume that for  the value  of the derivative exists. In this section, we show that by 
making this one additional assumption, it is possible to prove that the function  is differentiable everywhere. 
We make one final assumption: that there is a unique value of  for which  We define  to be this unique 
value, as we did in Introduction to Functions and Graphs. Figure 3.33 provides graphs of the functions 

 and  A visual estimate of the slopes of the tangent lines to these functions at 0 
provides evidence that the value of e lies somewhere between 2.7 and 2.8. The function  is called the natural 
exponential function. Its inverse,  is called the natural logarithmic function. 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.9 • Derivatives of Exponential and Logarithmic Functions     277

Figure 3.33 The graph of  is between  and 
For a better estimate of  we may construct a table of estimates of  for functions of the form  Before 
doing this, recall that 

for values of  very close to zero. For our estimates, we choose  and  to obtain the estimate 

See the following table. 

Table 3.7 Estimating a Value of 

The evidence from the table suggests that 
The graph of  together with the line  are shown in Figure 3.34. This line is tangent to the graph of 

 at 



278     3 • Derivatives

Figure 3.34 The tangent line to  at  has slope 1. 
Now that we have laid out our basic assumptions, we begin our investigation by exploring the derivative of 

 Recall that we have assumed that  exists. By applying the limit definition to the derivative we 
conclude that 

(3.28) 

Turning to  we obtain the following. 

We see that on the basis of the assumption that  is differentiable at  is not only differentiable 
everywhere, but its derivative is 

(3.29) 

For  Thus, we have  (The value of  for an arbitrary function of the form 
 will be derived later.) 

Theorem 3.14 

Derivative of the Natural Exponential Function 
Let  be the natural exponential function. Then 

In general, 

EXAMPLE 3.74 

Derivative of an Exponential Function 
Find the derivative of 

Solution 
Using the derivative formula and the chain rule, 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.9 • Derivatives of Exponential and Logarithmic Functions     279

EXAMPLE 3.75 

Combining Differentiation Rules 

Find the derivative of 

Solution 
Use the derivative of the natural exponential function, the quotient rule, and the chain rule. 

 3.50 Find the derivative of 

EXAMPLE 3.76 

Applying the Natural Exponential Function 
A colony of mosquitoes has an initial population of 1000. After  days, the population is given by  Show 
that the ratio of the rate of change of the population,  to the population,  is constant. 

Solution 
First find  By using the chain rule, we have  Thus, the ratio of the rate of change of the 
population to the population is given by 

The ratio of the rate of change of the population to the population is the constant 0.3. 

 3.51 If  describes the mosquito population after  days, as in the preceding example, what is 
the rate of change of  after 4 days? 

Derivative of the Logarithmic Function 
Now that we have the derivative of the natural exponential function, we can use implicit differentiation to find the 
derivative of its inverse, the natural logarithmic function. 

Theorem 3.15 

The Derivative of the Natural Logarithmic Function 
If  and  then 

(3.30) 

More generally, let  be a differentiable function. For all values of  for which  the derivative of 
 is given by 



280     3 • Derivatives

(3.31) 

Proof 
If  and  then  Differentiating both sides of this equation results in the equation 

Solving for  yields 

Finally, we substitute  to obtain 

We may also derive this result by applying the inverse function theorem, as follows. Since  is the inverse 
of  by applying the inverse function theorem we have 

Using this result and applying the chain rule to  yields 

□ 

The graph of  and its derivative  are shown in Figure 3.35. 

Figure 3.35  is increasing on ∞  Its derivative  is greater than zero on ∞

EXAMPLE 3.77 

Taking a Derivative of a Natural Logarithm 
Find the derivative of 

Solution 
Use Equation 3.31 directly. 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.9 • Derivatives of Exponential and Logarithmic Functions     281

EXAMPLE 3.78 

Using Properties of Logarithms in a Derivative 
Find the derivative of 

Solution 
At first glance, taking this derivative appears rather complicated. However, by using the properties of logarithms prior to 
finding the derivative, we can make the problem much simpler. 

 3.52 Differentiate: 

Now that we can differentiate the natural logarithmic function, we can use this result to find the derivatives of 
and  for 

Theorem 3.16 

Derivatives of General Exponential and Logarithmic Functions 
Let  and let  be a differentiable function. 

i. If,  then 
(3.32) 

More generally, if  then for all values of x for which 

(3.33) 

ii. If  then 
(3.34) 

More generally, if  then 
(3.35) 

Proof 
If  then  It follows that  Thus  Solving for  we have  Differentiating 
and keeping in mind that  is a constant, we see that 

The derivative in Equation 3.32 now follows from the chain rule. 
If  then  Using implicit differentiation, again keeping in mind that  is constant, it follows that 

 Solving for  and substituting  we see that 

The more general derivative (Equation 3.35) follows from the chain rule. 
□ 



282     3 • Derivatives

EXAMPLE 3.79 

Applying Derivative Formulas 
Find the derivative of 

Solution 
Use the quotient rule and Derivatives of General Exponential and Logarithmic Functions. 

EXAMPLE 3.80 

Finding the Slope of a Tangent Line 
Find the slope of the line tangent to the graph of  at 

Solution 
To find the slope, we must evaluate  at  Using Equation 3.33, we see that 

By evaluating the derivative at  we see that the tangent line has slope 

 3.53 Find the slope for the line tangent to  at 

Logarithmic Differentiation 
At this point, we can take derivatives of functions of the form  for certain values of  as well as functions of 
the form  where  and  Unfortunately, we still do not know the derivatives of functions such as 

 or  These functions require a technique called logarithmic differentiation, which allows us to 
differentiate any function of the form  It can also be used to convert a very complex differentiation 
problem into a simpler one, such as finding the derivative of  We outline this technique in the following 
problem-solving strategy. 

Problem-Solving Strategy 

Using Logarithmic Differentiation 
1. To differentiate  using logarithmic differentiation, take the natural logarithm of both sides of the 

equation to obtain 
2. Use properties of logarithms to expand  as much as possible. 
3. Differentiate both sides of the equation. On the left we will have 
4. Multiply both sides of the equation by  to solve for 
5. Replace  by 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.9 • Derivatives of Exponential and Logarithmic Functions     283

EXAMPLE 3.81 

Using Logarithmic Differentiation 
Find the derivative of 

Solution 
Use logarithmic differentiation to find this derivative. 

EXAMPLE 3.82 

Using Logarithmic Differentiation 
Find the derivative of 

Solution 
This problem really makes use of the properties of logarithms and the differentiation rules given in this chapter. 

EXAMPLE 3.83 

Extending the Power Rule 
Find the derivative of  where  is an arbitrary real number. 

Solution 
The process is the same as in Example 3.82, though with fewer complications. 

 3.54 Use logarithmic differentiation to find the derivative of 



284     3 • Derivatives

 3.55 Find the derivative of 

 SECTION 3.9 EXERCISES 
For the following exercises, find  for each function. 

331.  332 .  333 . 

334.  335 .  336 . 

337.  338 .  339 . 

340.  341 .  342 . 

343.  344 .  345 . 

For the following exercises, use logarithmic differentiation to find 

346.  347 .  348 . 

349.  350 .  351 . 

352.  353 .  354 . [T] Find an equation of 
the tangent line to the 
graph of 

 at the 
point where 

 Graph both the 
function and the tangent 
line. 

355. [T] Find an equation of  356 . [T] Find an equation of  357 . Consider the function 
the line that is normal to the tangent line to the  for 
the graph of graph of a. Determine the points 

 at the point on the graph where 
where  Graph both at the point (2, 1). (Hint: the tangent line is 
the function and the Use implicit horizontal. 
normal line. differentiation to find b. Determine the points 

 Graph both the on the graph where 
curve and the tangent  and those 
line. where 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.9 • Derivatives of Exponential and Logarithmic Functions     285

358. The formula  is  359 . [T] The population of  360 . [T] An isotope of the 
the formula for a Toledo, Ohio, in 2000 was element erbium has a 
decaying alternating approximately 500,000. half-life of approximately 
current. Assume the population is 12 hours. Initially there 
a. Complete the increasing at a rate of 5% are 9 grams of the 

following table with per year. isotope present. 
the appropriate a. Write the exponential a. Write the exponential 
values. function that relates function that relates 

the total population as the amount of 
a function of substance remaining 

b. Use a. to determine as a function of 
0 (i) the rate at which the measured in hours. 

population is b. Use a. to determine 
(ii) increasing in  years. the rate at which the 

c. Use b. to determine substance is decaying 
the rate at which the in  hours. 

(iii) population is c. Use b. to determine 
increasing in 10 years. the rate of decay at 

(iv)  hours. 

(v) 

(vi) 

(vii) 

(viii) 

(ix) 

b. Using only the values 
in the table, determine 
where the tangent line 
to the graph of  is 
horizontal. 



286     3 • Derivatives

361. [T] The number of cases of influenza  362 . [T] The relative rate of 
in New York City from the beginning change of a differentiable 
of 1960 to the beginning of 1964 is function  is given 
modeled by the function by  One model 

for population growth is a 
where  gives the number of Gompertz growth 
cases (in thousands) and t is function, given by 
measured in years, with 
corresponding to the beginning of  where 
1960.  and  are constants. 
a. Show work that evaluates a. Find the relative rate 

and  Briefly describe what of change formula for 
these values indicate about the the generic Gompertz 
disease in New York City. function. 

b. Show work that evaluates b. Use a. to find the 
and  Briefly describe what relative rate of change 
these values indicate about the of a population in 
disease in New York City.  months when 

and 
c. Briefly interpret what 

the result of b. means. 

For the following exercises, use the population of New York City from 1790 to 1860, given in the following table. 

Years since 1790 Population 

0 33,131 

10 60,515 

20 96,373 

30 123,706 

40 202,300 

50 312,710 

60 515,547 

70 813,669 

Table 3.8 New York City 
Population Over Time Source: 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Largest_cities_in_the_United_States 

_by_population_by_decade. 

363. [T] Using a computer  364 . [T] Using the exponential  365 . [T] Using the exponential 
program or a calculator, best fit for the data, write best fit for the data, write 
fit a growth curve to the a table containing the a table containing the 
data of the form derivatives evaluated at second derivatives 

each year. evaluated at each year. 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.9 • Derivatives of Exponential and Logarithmic Functions     287

366. [T] Using the tables of 
first and second 
derivatives and the best 
fit, answer the following 
questions: 
a. Will the model be 

accurate in predicting 
the future population 
of New York City? Why 
or why not? 

b. Estimate the 
population in 2010. 
Was the prediction 
correct from a.? 



288     3 • Chapter Review

Chapter Review 
Key Terms 
acceleration  is the rate of change of the velocity, that is, the derivative of velocity 
amount of change  the amount of a function  over an interval  is 
average rate of change  is a function  over an interval  is 
chain rule  the chain rule defines the derivative of a composite function as the derivative of the outer function 

evaluated at the inner function times the derivative of the inner function 
constant multiple rule  the derivative of a constant c multiplied by a function f is the same as the constant multiplied 

by the derivative: 
constant rule  the derivative of a constant function is zero:  where c is a constant 
derivative  the slope of the tangent line to a function at a point, calculated by taking the limit of the difference 

quotient, is the derivative 
derivative function  gives the derivative of a function at each point in the domain of the original function for which the 

derivative is defined 
difference quotient  of a function  at  is given by 

difference rule  the derivative of the difference of a function f and a function g is the same as the difference of the 
derivative of f and the derivative of g: 

differentiable at a  a function for which  exists is differentiable at 
differentiable function  a function for which  exists is a differentiable function 
differentiable on S  a function for which  exists for each  in the open set  is differentiable on 
differentiation  the process of taking a derivative 
higher-order derivative  a derivative of a derivative, from the second derivative to the nth derivative, is called a higher-

order derivative 
implicit differentiation  is a technique for computing  for a function defined by an equation, accomplished by 

differentiating both sides of the equation (remembering to treat the variable  as a function) and solving for 
instantaneous rate of change  the rate of change of a function at any point along the function  also called  or 

the derivative of the function at 
logarithmic differentiation  is a technique that allows us to differentiate a function by first taking the natural 

logarithm of both sides of an equation, applying properties of logarithms to simplify the equation, and differentiating 
implicitly 

marginal cost  is the derivative of the cost function, or the approximate cost of producing one more item 
marginal profit  is the derivative of the profit function, or the approximate profit obtained by producing and selling 

one more item 
marginal revenue  is the derivative of the revenue function, or the approximate revenue obtained by selling one more 

item 
population growth rate  is the derivative of the population with respect to time 
power rule  the derivative of a power function is a function in which the power on  becomes the coefficient of the 

term and the power on  in the derivative decreases by 1: If  is an integer, then 
product rule  the derivative of a product of two functions is the derivative of the first function times the second 

function plus the derivative of the second function times the first function: 
quotient rule  the derivative of the quotient of two functions is the derivative of the first function times the second 

function minus the derivative of the second function times the first function, all divided by the square of the second 
function: 

speed  is the absolute value of velocity, that is,  is the speed of an object at time  whose velocity is given by 
sum rule  the derivative of the sum of a function f and a function g is the same as the sum of the derivative of f and the 

derivative of g: 

Access for free at openstax.org



3 • Chapter Review     289

Key Equations 

Difference quotient 

Difference quotient with increment 

Slope of tangent line 

Derivative of  at 

Average velocity 

Instantaneous velocity 

The derivative function 

Derivative of sine function 

Derivative of cosine function 

Derivative of tangent function 

Derivative of cotangent function 

Derivative of secant function 

Derivative of cosecant function 

The chain rule 

The power rule for functions 

 whenever  and  is 
Inverse function theorem 

differentiable. 

Power rule with rational exponents 

Derivative of inverse sine function 

Derivative of inverse cosine function 



290     3 • Chapter Review

Derivative of inverse tangent 
function 

Derivative of inverse cotangent 
function 

Derivative of inverse secant function 

Derivative of inverse cosecant 
function 

Derivative of the natural exponential function 

Derivative of the natural logarithmic function 

Derivative of the general exponential function 

Derivative of the general logarithmic function 

Key Concepts 
3.1 Defining the Derivative 

• The slope of the tangent line to a curve measures the instantaneous rate of change of a curve. We can calculate it by 
finding the limit of the difference quotient or the difference quotient with increment 

• The derivative of a function  at a value  is found using either of the definitions for the slope of the tangent 
line. 

• Velocity is the rate of change of position. As such, the velocity  at time  is the derivative of the position  at 
time  Average velocity is given by 

Instantaneous velocity is given by 

• We may estimate a derivative by using a table of values. 

3.2 The Derivative as a Function 
• The derivative of a function  is the function whose value at  is 
• The graph of a derivative of a function  is related to the graph of  Where  has a tangent line with 

positive slope,  Where  has a tangent line with negative slope,  Where  has a 
horizontal tangent line, 

• If a function is differentiable at a point, then it is continuous at that point. A function is not differentiable at a point if 
it is not continuous at the point, if it has a vertical tangent line at the point, or if the graph has a sharp corner or 
cusp. 

• Higher-order derivatives are derivatives of derivatives, from the second derivative to the  derivative. 

3.3 Differentiation Rules 
• The derivative of a constant function is zero. 
• The derivative of a power function is a function in which the power on  becomes the coefficient of the term and the 

power on  in the derivative decreases by 1. 
• The derivative of a constant c multiplied by a function f is the same as the constant multiplied by the derivative. 
• The derivative of the sum of a function f and a function g is the same as the sum of the derivative of f and the 

Access for free at openstax.org



3 • Chapter Review     291

derivative of g. 
• The derivative of the difference of a function f and a function g is the same as the difference of the derivative of f 

and the derivative of g. 
• The derivative of a product of two functions is the derivative of the first function times the second function plus the 

derivative of the second function times the first function. 
• The derivative of the quotient of two functions is the derivative of the first function times the second function minus 

the derivative of the second function times the first function, all divided by the square of the second function. 
• We used the limit definition of the derivative to develop formulas that allow us to find derivatives without resorting 

to the definition of the derivative. These formulas can be used singly or in combination with each other. 

3.4 Derivatives as Rates of Change 
• Using  it is possible to estimate  given  and 
• The rate of change of position is velocity, and the rate of change of velocity is acceleration. Speed is the absolute 

value, or magnitude, of velocity. 
• The population growth rate and the present population can be used to predict the size of a future population. 
• Marginal cost, marginal revenue, and marginal profit functions can be used to predict, respectively, the cost of 

producing one more item, the revenue obtained by selling one more item, and the profit obtained by producing and 
selling one more item. 

3.5 Derivatives of Trigonometric Functions 
• We can find the derivatives of sin x and cos x by using the definition of derivative and the limit formulas found 

earlier. The results are 

• With these two formulas, we can determine the derivatives of all six basic trigonometric functions. 

3.6 The Chain Rule 
• The chain rule allows us to differentiate compositions of two or more functions. It states that for 

In Leibniz’s notation this rule takes the form 

• We can use the chain rule with other rules that we have learned, and we can derive formulas for some of them. 
• The chain rule combines with the power rule to form a new rule: 

• When applied to the composition of three functions, the chain rule can be expressed as follows: If 
 then 

3.7 Derivatives of Inverse Functions 
• The inverse function theorem allows us to compute derivatives of inverse functions without using the limit definition 

of the derivative. 
• We can use the inverse function theorem to develop differentiation formulas for the inverse trigonometric 

functions. 

3.8 Implicit Differentiation 
• We use implicit differentiation to find derivatives of implicitly defined functions (functions defined by equations). 
• By using implicit differentiation, we can find the equation of a tangent line to the graph of a curve. 

3.9 Derivatives of Exponential and Logarithmic Functions 
• On the basis of the assumption that the exponential function  is continuous everywhere and 

differentiable at 0, this function is differentiable everywhere and there is a formula for its derivative. 
• We can use a formula to find the derivative of  and the relationship  allows us to extend our 

differentiation formulas to include logarithms with arbitrary bases. 
• Logarithmic differentiation allows us to differentiate functions of the form  or very complex functions by 

taking the natural logarithm of both sides and exploiting the properties of logarithms before differentiating. 



292     3 • Chapter Review

Review Exercises 
True or False? Justify the answer with a proof or a counterexample. 
367. Every function has a  368 . A continuous function has  369 . A continuous function has 

derivative. a continuous derivative. a derivative. 
370. If a function is 

differentiable, it is 
continuous. 

Use the limit definition of the derivative to exactly evaluate the derivative. 

371.  372 . 

Find the derivatives of the following functions. 

373.  374 .  375 . 

376.  377 .  378 . 

379.  380 . 

Find the following derivatives of various orders. 
381. First derivative of  382 . Third derivative of  383 . Second derivative of 

Find an equation of the tangent line to the following equations at the specified point. 

384.  at  385 .  at 

Draw the derivative for the following graphs. 

386.  387 . 

The following questions concern the water level in Ocean City, New Jersey, in January, which can be approximated by 
 where t is measured in hours after midnight, and the height is measured in feet. 

388. Find and graph the  389 . Find  What is the 
derivative. What is the physical meaning of this 
physical meaning? value? 

Access for free at openstax.org



3 • Chapter Review     293

The following questions consider the wind speeds of Hurricane Katrina, which affected New Orleans, Louisiana, in 
August 2005. The data are displayed in a table. 

Hours after Midnight, August 26 Wind Speed (mph) 

1 45 

5 75 

11 100 

29 115 

49 145 

58 175 

73 155 

81 125 

85 95 

107 35 

Table 3.9 Wind Speeds of Hurricane Katrina Source: 
http://news.nationalgeographic.com/news/2005/09/
0914_050914_katrina_timeline.html. 

390. Using the table, estimate  391 . Estimate the derivative of 
the derivative of the wind the wind speed at hour 
speed at hour 39. What is 83. What is the physical 
the physical meaning? meaning? 



294     3 • Chapter Review

Access for free at openstax.org



4 • Introduction          295

4 APPLICATIONS OF DERIVATIVES 

Figure 4.1 As a rocket is being launched, at what rate should the angle of a video camera change to continue viewing the 
rocket? (credit: modification of work by Steve Jurvetson, Wikimedia Commons) 

Chapter Outline 
4.1 Related Rates 
4.2 Linear Approximations and Differentials 
4.3 Maxima and Minima 
4.4 The Mean Value Theorem 
4.5 Derivatives and the Shape of a Graph 
4.6 Limits at Infinity and Asymptotes 
4.7 Applied Optimization Problems 
4.8 L’Hôpital’s Rule 
4.9 Newton’s Method 
4.10 Antiderivatives 

Introduction 
A rocket is being launched from the ground and cameras are recording the event. A video camera is located on the 
ground a certain distance from the launch pad. At what rate should the angle of inclination (the angle the camera makes 
with the ground) change to allow the camera to record the flight of the rocket as it heads upward? (See Example 4.3.) 
A rocket launch involves two related quantities that change over time. Being able to solve this type of problem is just one 
application of derivatives introduced in this chapter. We also look at how derivatives are used to find maximum and 
minimum values of functions. As a result, we will be able to solve applied optimization problems, such as maximizing 
revenue and minimizing surface area. In addition, we examine how derivatives are used to evaluate complicated limits, 
to approximate roots of functions, and to provide accurate graphs of functions. 



296     4 • Applications of Derivatives

4.1 Related Rates 
Learning Objectives 

4.1.1 Express changing quantities in terms of derivatives. 
4.1.2 Find relationships among the derivatives in a given problem. 
4.1.3 Use the chain rule to find the rate of change of one quantity that depends on the rate of change of 

other quantities. 
We have seen that for quantities that are changing over time, the rates at which these quantities change are given by 
derivatives. If two related quantities are changing over time, the rates at which the quantities change are related. For 
example, if a balloon is being filled with air, both the radius of the balloon and the volume of the balloon are increasing. 
In this section, we consider several problems in which two or more related quantities are changing and we study how to 
determine the relationship between the rates of change of these quantities. 

Setting up Related-Rates Problems 
In many real-world applications, related quantities are changing with respect to time. For example, if we consider the 
balloon example again, we can say that the rate of change in the volume,  is related to the rate of change in the 
radius,  In this case, we say that  and  are related rates because V is related to r. Here we study several examples 
of related quantities that are changing with respect to time and we look at how to calculate one rate of change given 
another rate of change. 

EXAMPLE 4.1 

Inflating a Balloon 
A spherical balloon is being filled with air at the constant rate of  (Figure 4.2). How fast is the radius increasing 
when the radius is 

Figure 4.2 As the balloon is being filled with air, both the radius and the volume are increasing with respect to time. 

Solution 
The volume of a sphere of radius  centimeters is 

Since the balloon is being filled with air, both the volume and the radius are functions of time. Therefore,  seconds after 
beginning to fill the balloon with air, the volume of air in the balloon is 

Differentiating both sides of this equation with respect to time and applying the chain rule, we see that the rate of 
change in the volume is related to the rate of change in the radius by the equation 

The balloon is being filled with air at the constant rate of 2 cm3/sec, so  Therefore, 

Access for free at openstax.org



4.1 • Related Rates     297

which implies 

When the radius 

 4.1 What is the instantaneous rate of change of the radius when 

Before looking at other examples, let’s outline the problem-solving strategy we will be using to solve related-rates 
problems. 

Problem-Solving Strategy 

Solving a Related-Rates Problem 
1. Assign symbols to all variables involved in the problem. Draw a figure if applicable. 
2. State, in terms of the variables, the information that is given and the rate to be determined. 
3. Find an equation relating the variables introduced in step 1. 
4. Using the chain rule, differentiate both sides of the equation found in step 3 with respect to the independent 

variable. This new equation will relate the derivatives. 
5. Substitute all known values into the equation from step 4, then solve for the unknown rate of change. 

Note that when solving a related-rates problem, it is crucial not to substitute known values too soon. For example, if the 
value for a changing quantity is substituted into an equation before both sides of the equation are differentiated, then 
that quantity will behave as a constant and its derivative will not appear in the new equation found in step 4. We 
examine this potential error in the following example. 

Examples of the Process 
Let’s now implement the strategy just described to solve several related-rates problems. The first example involves a 
plane flying overhead. The relationship we are studying is between the speed of the plane and the rate at which the 
distance between the plane and a person on the ground is changing. 

EXAMPLE 4.2 

An Airplane Flying at a Constant Elevation 
An airplane is flying overhead at a constant elevation of  A man is viewing the plane from a position  from 
the base of a radio tower. The airplane is flying horizontally away from the man. If the plane is flying at the rate of 

 at what rate is the distance between the man and the plane increasing when the plane passes over the radio 
tower? 

Solution 
Step 1. Draw a picture, introducing variables to represent the different quantities involved. 



298     4 • Applications of Derivatives

Figure 4.3 An airplane is flying at a constant height of 4000 ft. The distance between the person and the airplane and the 
person and the place on the ground directly below the airplane are changing. We denote those quantities with the 
variables  and  respectively. 
As shown,  denotes the distance between the man and the position on the ground directly below the airplane. The 
variable  denotes the distance between the man and the plane. Note that both  and  are functions of time. We do not 
introduce a variable for the height of the plane because it remains at a constant elevation of  Since an object’s 
height above the ground is measured as the shortest distance between the object and the ground, the line segment of 
length 4000 ft is perpendicular to the line segment of length  feet, creating a right triangle. 
Step 2. Since  denotes the horizontal distance between the man and the point on the ground below the plane, 
represents the speed of the plane. We are told the speed of the plane is 600 ft/sec. Therefore,  ft/sec. Since we 
are asked to find the rate of change in the distance between the man and the plane when the plane is directly above the 
radio tower, we need to find  when 
Step 3. From the figure, we can use the Pythagorean theorem to write an equation relating  and 

Step 4. Differentiating this equation with respect to time and using the fact that the derivative of a constant is zero, we 
arrive at the equation 

Step 5. Find the rate at which the distance between the man and the plane is increasing when the plane is directly over 
the radio tower. That is, find  when  Since the speed of the plane is  we know that 

 We are not given an explicit value for  however, since we are trying to find  when  we 
can use the Pythagorean theorem to determine the distance  when  and the height is  Solving the 
equation 

for  we have  at the time of interest. Using these values, we conclude that  is a solution of the equation 

Therefore, 

Note: When solving related-rates problems, it is important not to substitute values for the variables too soon. For 
example, in step 3, we related the variable quantities  and  by the equation 

Access for free at openstax.org



4.1 • Related Rates     299

Since the plane remains at a constant height, it is not necessary to introduce a variable for the height, and we are 
allowed to use the constant 4000 to denote that quantity. However, the other two quantities are changing. If we 
mistakenly substituted  into the equation before differentiating, our equation would have been 

After differentiating, our equation would become 

As a result, we would incorrectly conclude that 

 4.2 What is the speed of the plane if the distance between the person and the plane is increasing at the rate of 

We now return to the problem involving the rocket launch from the beginning of the chapter. 

EXAMPLE 4.3 

Chapter Opener: A Rocket Launch 

Figure 4.4 (credit: modification of work by Steve Jurvetson, Wikimedia Commons) 
A rocket is launched so that it rises vertically. A camera is positioned  from the launch pad. When the rocket is 

 above the launch pad, its velocity is  Find the necessary rate of change of the camera’s angle as a 
function of time so that it stays focused on the rocket. 

Solution 
Step 1. Draw a picture introducing the variables. 



300     4 • Applications of Derivatives

Figure 4.5 A camera is positioned 5000 ft from the launch pad of the rocket. The height of the rocket and the angle of 
the camera are changing with respect to time. We denote those quantities with the variables  and  respectively. 
Let  denote the height of the rocket above the launch pad and  be the angle between the camera lens and the ground. 
Step 2. We are trying to find the rate of change in the angle of the camera with respect to time when the rocket is 1000 ft 
off the ground. That is, we need to find  when  At that time, we know the velocity of the rocket is 

Step 3. Now we need to find an equation relating the two quantities that are changing with respect to time:  and  How 
can we create such an equation? Using the fact that we have drawn a right triangle, it is natural to think about 
trigonometric functions. Recall that  is the ratio of the length of the opposite side of the triangle to the length of the 
adjacent side. Thus, we have 

This gives us the equation 

Step 4. Differentiating this equation with respect to time  we obtain 

Step 5. We want to find  when  At this time, we know that  We need to determine 
Recall that  is the ratio of the length of the hypotenuse to the length of the adjacent side. We know the length of the 
adjacent side is  To determine the length of the hypotenuse, we use the Pythagorean theorem, where the length 
of one leg is  the length of the other leg is  and the length of the hypotenuse is  feet as shown in the 
following figure. 

We see that 

and we conclude that the hypotenuse is 

Access for free at openstax.org



4.1 • Related Rates     301

Therefore, when  we have 

Recall from step 4 that the equation relating  to our known values is 

When  we know that  and  Substituting these values into the previous equation, 
we arrive at the equation 

Therefore, 

 4.3 What rate of change is necessary for the elevation angle of the camera if the camera is placed on the 
ground at a distance of  from the launch pad and the velocity of the rocket is 500 ft/sec when the 
rocket is  off the ground? 

In the next example, we consider water draining from a cone-shaped funnel. We compare the rate at which the level of 
water in the cone is decreasing with the rate at which the volume of water is decreasing. 

EXAMPLE 4.4 

Water Draining from a Funnel 
Water is draining from the bottom of a cone-shaped funnel at the rate of  The height of the funnel is 2 ft and 
the radius at the top of the funnel is  At what rate is the height of the water in the funnel changing when the height 
of the water is 

Solution 
Step 1: Draw a picture introducing the variables. 

Figure 4.6 Water is draining from a funnel of height 2 ft and radius 1 ft. The height of the water and the radius of water 
are changing over time. We denote these quantities with the variables  and  respectively. 



302     4 • Applications of Derivatives

Let  denote the height of the water in the funnel,  denote the radius of the water at its surface, and  denote the 
volume of the water. 

Step 2: We need to determine  when  We know that 

Step 3: The volume of water in the cone is 

From the figure, we see that we have similar triangles. Therefore, the ratio of the sides in the two triangles is the same. 
Therefore,  or  Using this fact, the equation for volume can be simplified to 

Step 4: Applying the chain rule while differentiating both sides of this equation with respect to time  we obtain 

Step 5: We want to find  when  Since water is leaving at the rate of  we know that 
 Therefore, 

which implies 

It follows that 

 4.4 At what rate is the height of the water changing when the height of the water is 

 SECTION 4.1 EXERCISES 
For the following exercises, find the quantities for the given equation. 

1 . Find  at  and  2 . Find  at  and  3 . Find  at  and 
 if  if  if  and 

Access for free at openstax.org



4.1 • Related Rates     303

For the following exercises, sketch the situation if necessary and used related rates to solve for the quantities. 
4 . [T] If two electrical resistors  5 . A 10-ft ladder is leaning against a  6 . A 25-ft ladder is leaning 

are connected in parallel, wall. If the top of the ladder slides against a wall. If we push 
the total resistance down the wall at a rate of 2 ft/sec, the ladder toward the wall 
(measured in ohms, how fast is the bottom moving at a rate of 1 ft/sec, and the 
denoted by the Greek along the ground when the bottom bottom of the ladder is 
capital letter omega,  is of the ladder is 5 ft from the wall? initially  away from the 
given by the equation wall, how fast does the 

 If  is ladder move up the wall 
increasing at a rate of  after we start pushing? 

 and  decreases 
at a rate of  at 
what rate does the total 
resistance change when 

 and ? 

7 . Two airplanes are flying in the air  8 . You and a friend are riding  9 . Two buses are driving along 
at the same height: airplane A is your bikes to a restaurant parallel freeways that are 
flying east at 250 mi/h and airplane that you think is east; your  apart, one heading east 
B is flying north at  If they friend thinks the restaurant and the other heading west. 
are both heading to the same is north. You both leave Assuming that each bus 
airport, located 30 miles east of from the same point, with drives a constant 
airplane A and 40 miles north of you riding at 16 mph east find the rate at which the 
airplane B, at what rate is the and your friend riding distance between the buses 
distance between the airplanes  north. After you is changing when they are 
changing? traveled  at what rate is  apart, heading toward 

the distance between you each other. 
changing? 



304     4 • Applications of Derivatives

10 . A 6-ft-tall person walks away from a11 . Using the previous  12 . A 5-ft-tall person walks 
10-ft lamppost at a constant rate of problem, what is the rate toward a wall at a rate of 2 

 What is the rate that the tip at which the tip of the ft/sec. A spotlight is located 
of the shadow moves away from the shadow moves away from on the ground 40 ft from 
pole when the person is  away the person when the the wall. How fast does the 
from the pole? person is 10 ft from the height of the person’s 

pole? shadow on the wall change 
when the person is 10 ft 
from the wall? 

13 . Using the previous  14 . A helicopter starting on the  15 . Using the previous 
problem, what is the rate ground is rising directly problem, what is the rate 
at which the shadow into the air at a rate of 25 at which the distance 
changes when the person ft/sec. You are running on between you and the 
is 10 ft from the wall, if the the ground starting directly helicopter is changing 
person is walking away under the helicopter at a when the helicopter has 
from the wall at a rate of 2 rate of 10 ft/sec. Find the risen to a height of 60 ft in 
ft/sec? rate of change of the the air, assuming that, 

distance between the initially, it was 30 ft above 
helicopter and yourself you? 
after 5 sec. 

For the following exercises, draw and label diagrams to help solve the related-rates problems. 
16 . The side of a cube  17 . The volume of a cube  18 . The radius of a circle 

increases at a rate of  m/ decreases at a rate of 10 increases at a rate of  m/
sec. Find the rate at which m3/s. Find the rate at sec. Find the rate at which 
the volume of the cube which the side of the cube the area of the circle 
increases when the side of changes when the side of increases when the radius 
the cube is 4 m. the cube is 2 m. is 5 m. 

19 . The radius of a sphere  20 . The radius of a sphere  21 . The radius of a sphere is 
decreases at a rate of  m/ increases at a rate of  m/ increasing at a rate of 9 
sec. Find the rate at which sec. Find the rate at which cm/sec. Find the radius of 
the surface area decreases the volume increases when the sphere when the 
when the radius is 10 m. the radius is  m. volume and the radius of 

the sphere are increasing 
at the same numerical rate. 

22 . The base of a triangle is  23 . A triangle has two constant  24 . A triangle has a height that 
shrinking at a rate of 1 cm/ sides of length 3 ft and 5 ft. is increasing at a rate of 2 
min and the height of the The angle between these cm/sec and its area is 
triangle is increasing at a two sides is increasing at a increasing at a rate of 4 
rate of 5 cm/min. Find the rate of 0.1 rad/sec. Find the cm2/sec. Find the rate at 
rate at which the area of rate at which the area of which the base of the 
the triangle changes when the triangle is changing triangle is changing when 
the height is 22 cm and the when the angle between the height of the triangle is 
base is 10 cm. the two sides is 4 cm and the area is 20 

cm2. 

Access for free at openstax.org



4.1 • Related Rates     305

For the following exercises, consider a right cone that is leaking water. The dimensions of the conical tank are a height of 
16 ft and a radius of 5 ft. 
25 . How fast does the depth of  26 . Find the rate at which the  27 . If the water level is 

the water change when the surface area of the water decreasing at a rate of 3 in/
water is 10 ft high if the changes when the water is min when the depth of the 
cone leaks water at a rate 10 ft high if the cone leaks water is 8 ft, determine the 
of 10 ft3/min? water at a rate of 10 rate at which water is 

ft3/min. leaking out of the cone. 
28 . A vertical cylinder is  29 . A vertical cylinder is  30 . A trough has ends shaped like 

leaking water at a rate of 1 leaking water but you are isosceles triangles, with width 3 m 
ft3/sec. If the cylinder has a unable to determine at and height 4 m, and the trough is 10 
height of 10 ft and a radius what rate. The cylinder has m long. Water is being pumped into 
of 1 ft, at what rate is the a height of 2 m and a the trough at a rate of  At 
height of the water radius of 2 m. Find the rate what rate does the height of the 
changing when the height at which the water is water change when the water is 1 m 
is 6 ft? leaking out of the cylinder deep? 

if the rate at which the 
height is decreasing is 10 
cm/min when the height is 
1 m. 

31 . A tank is shaped like an upside-
down square pyramid, with base of 
4 m by 4 m and a height of 12 m 
(see the following figure). How fast 
does the height increase when the 
water is 2 m deep if water is being 
pumped in at a rate of  m3/sec? 



306     4 • Applications of Derivatives

For the following problems, consider a pool shaped like the bottom half of a sphere, that is being filled at a rate of 25 
ft3/min. The radius of the pool is 10 ft. The formula for the volume of a partial hemisphere is  where 
is the height of the water and  is the radius of the water. 
32 . Find the rate at which the  33 . Find the rate at which the  34 . If the height is increasing 

depth of the water is depth of the water is at a rate of 1 in./min when 
changing when the water changing when the water the depth of the water is 2 
has a depth of 5 ft. has a depth of 1 ft. ft, find the rate at which 

water is being pumped in. 
35 . Gravel is being unloaded  36 . Using a similar setup from 

from a truck and falls into a the preceding problem, 
pile shaped like a cone at a find the rate at which the 
rate of 10 ft3/min. The gravel is being unloaded if 
radius of the cone base is the pile is 5 ft high and the 
three times the height of height is increasing at a 
the cone. Find the rate at rate of 4 in./min. 
which the height of the 
gravel changes when the 
pile has a height of 5 ft. 

For the following exercises, solve the related-rates problems. Consider making a sketch that represents the situation to 
help you understand each problem. 
37 . You are stationary on the  38 . You stand 40 ft from a  39 . A lighthouse, L, is on an island 4 mi 

ground and are watching a bottle rocket on the away from the closest point, P, on 
bird fly horizontally at a ground and watch as it the beach (see the following image). 
rate of  m/sec. The bird takes off vertically into the If the lighthouse light rotates 
is located 40 m above your air at a rate of 20 ft/sec. clockwise at a constant rate of 10 
head. How fast does the Find the rate at which the revolutions/min, how fast does the 
angle of elevation change angle of elevation changes beam of light move across the 
when the horizontal when the rocket is 30 ft in beach 2 mi away from the closest 
distance between you and the air. point on the beach? 
the bird is 9 m? 

Access for free at openstax.org



4.1 • Related Rates     307

40 . Using the same setup as  41 . You are walking to a bus 
the previous problem, stop at a right-angle 
determine at what rate the corner. You move north at 
beam of light moves across a rate of 2 m/sec and are 
the beach 1 mi away from 20 m south of the 
the closest point on the intersection. The bus 
beach. travels west at a rate of 10 

m/sec away from the 
intersection – you have 
missed the bus! What is the 
rate at which the angle 
between you and the bus is 
changing when you are 20 
m south of the intersection 
and the bus is 10 m west of 
the intersection? 

For the following exercises, refer to the figure of baseball diamond, which has sides of 90 ft. 

 42 . [T] A batter hits a ball  43 . [T] A batter hits a ball 
toward third base at 75 ft/ toward second base at 80 
sec and runs toward first ft/sec and runs toward first 
base at a rate of 24 ft/sec. base at a rate of 30 ft/sec. 
At what rate does the At what rate does the 
distance between the ball distance between the ball 
and the batter change and the batter change 
when 2 sec have passed? when the runner has 

covered one-third of the 
distance to first base? 
(Hint: Recall the law of 
cosines.) 

44 . [T] A batter hits the ball  45 . [T] Runners start at first 
and runs toward first base and second base. When 
at a speed of 22 ft/sec. At the baseball is hit, the 
what rate does the runner at first base runs at 
distance between the a speed of 18 ft/sec toward 
runner and second base second base and the 
change when the runner runner at second base 
has run 30 ft? runs at a speed of 20 ft/sec 

toward third base. How 
fast is the distance 
between runners changing 
1 sec after the ball is hit? 



308     4 • Applications of Derivatives

4.2 Linear Approximations and Differentials 
Learning Objectives 

4.2.1 Describe the linear approximation to a function at a point. 
4.2.2 Write the linearization of a given function. 
4.2.3 Draw a graph that illustrates the use of differentials to approximate the change in a quantity. 
4.2.4 Calculate the relative error and percentage error in using a differential approximation. 

We have just seen how derivatives allow us to compare related quantities that are changing over time. In this section, we 
examine another application of derivatives: the ability to approximate functions locally by linear functions. Linear 
functions are the easiest functions with which to work, so they provide a useful tool for approximating function values. In 
addition, the ideas presented in this section are generalized later in the text when we study how to approximate 
functions by higher-degree polynomials Introduction to Power Series and Functions (http://openstax.org/books/calculus-
volume-2/pages/6-introduction). 

Linear Approximation of a Function at a Point 
Consider a function  that is differentiable at a point  Recall that the tangent line to the graph of  at  is given by 
the equation 

For example, consider the function  at  Since  is differentiable at  and  we see that 
 Therefore, the tangent line to the graph of  at  is given by the equation 

Figure 4.7(a) shows a graph of  along with the tangent line to  at  Note that for  near 2, the graph of 
the tangent line is close to the graph of  As a result, we can use the equation of the tangent line to approximate 
for  near 2. For example, if  the  value of the corresponding point on the tangent line is 

The actual value of  is given by 

Therefore, the tangent line gives us a fairly good approximation of  (Figure 4.7(b)). However, note that for values of 
 far from 2, the equation of the tangent line does not give us a good approximation. For example, if  the -value 

of the corresponding point on the tangent line is 

whereas the value of the function at  is 

Access for free at openstax.org



4.2 • Linear Approximations and Differentials     309

Figure 4.7 (a) The tangent line to  at  provides a good approximation to  for  near 2. (b) At  the 
value of  on the tangent line to  is 0.475. The actual value of  is  which is approximately 0.47619. 
In general, for a differentiable function  the equation of the tangent line to  at  can be used to approximate 

 for  near  Therefore, we can write 

We call the linear function 

(4.1) 

the linear approximation, or tangent line approximation, of  at  This function  is also known as the 
linearization of  at 

To show how useful the linear approximation can be, we look at how to find the linear approximation for  at 

EXAMPLE 4.5 

Linear Approximation of 
Find the linear approximation of  at  and use the approximation to estimate 

Solution 
Since we are looking for the linear approximation at  using Equation 4.1 we know the linear approximation is given 
by 

We need to find  and 

Therefore, the linear approximation is given by Figure 4.8. 

Using the linear approximation, we can estimate  by writing 



310     4 • Applications of Derivatives

Figure 4.8 The local linear approximation to  at  provides an approximation to  for  near 9. 

Analysis 
Using a calculator, the value of  to four decimal places is 3.0166. The value given by the linear approximation, 
3.0167, is very close to the value obtained with a calculator, so it appears that using this linear approximation is a good 
way to estimate  at least for  near  At the same time, it may seem odd to use a linear approximation when we can 
just push a few buttons on a calculator to evaluate  However, how does the calculator evaluate  The 
calculator uses an approximation! In fact, calculators and computers use approximations all the time to evaluate 
mathematical expressions; they just use higher-degree approximations. 

 4.5 Find the local linear approximation to  at  Use it to approximate  to five decimal 
places. 

EXAMPLE 4.6 

Linear Approximation of 
Find the linear approximation of  at  and use it to approximate 

Solution 
First we note that since  rad is equivalent to  using the linear approximation at  seems reasonable. The 
linear approximation is given by 

We see that 

Therefore, the linear approximation of  at  is given by Figure 4.9. 

To estimate  using  we must first convert  to radians. We have  radians, so the estimate for 
 is given by 

Access for free at openstax.org



4.2 • Linear Approximations and Differentials     311

Figure 4.9 The linear approximation to  at  provides an approximation to  for  near 

 4.6 Find the linear approximation for  at 

Linear approximations may be used in estimating roots and powers. In the next example, we find the linear 
approximation for  at  which can be used to estimate roots and powers for real numbers near 1. 
The same idea can be extended to a function of the form  to estimate roots and powers near a different 
number 

EXAMPLE 4.7 

Approximating Roots and Powers 
Find the linear approximation of  at  Use this approximation to estimate 

Solution 
The linear approximation at  is given by 

Because 

the linear approximation is given by Figure 4.10(a). 

We can approximate  by evaluating  when  We conclude that 



312     4 • Applications of Derivatives

Figure 4.10 (a) The linear approximation of  at  is  (b) The actual value of  is 1.030301. The linear 
approximation of  at  estimates  to be 1.03. 

 4.7 Find the linear approximation of  at  without using the result from the preceding 
example. 

Differentials 
We have seen that linear approximations can be used to estimate function values. They can also be used to estimate the 
amount a function value changes as a result of a small change in the input. To discuss this more formally, we define a 
related concept: differentials. Differentials provide us with a way of estimating the amount a function changes as a 
result of a small change in input values. 
When we first looked at derivatives, we used the Leibniz notation  to represent the derivative of  with respect to 
Although we used the expressions dy and dx in this notation, they did not have meaning on their own. Here we see a 
meaning to the expressions dy and dx. Suppose  is a differentiable function. Let dx be an independent variable 
that can be assigned any nonzero real number, and define the dependent variable  by 

(4.2) 

It is important to notice that  is a function of both  and  The expressions dy and dx are called differentials. We can 
divide both sides of Equation 4.2 by  which yields 

(4.3) 

This is the familiar expression we have used to denote a derivative. Equation 4.2 is known as the differential form of 
Equation 4.3. 

EXAMPLE 4.8 

Computing differentials 
For each of the following functions, find dy and evaluate when  and 

a. 
b. 

Solution 
The key step is calculating the derivative. When we have that, we can obtain dy directly. 

a. Since  we know  and therefore 

Access for free at openstax.org



4.2 • Linear Approximations and Differentials     313

When  and 

b. Since   This gives us 

When  and 

 4.8 For  find 

We now connect differentials to linear approximations. Differentials can be used to estimate the change in the value of a 
function resulting from a small change in input values. Consider a function  that is differentiable at point  Suppose 
the input  changes by a small amount. We are interested in how much the output  changes. If  changes from  to 

 then the change in  is  (also denoted  and the change in  is given by 

Instead of calculating the exact change in  however, it is often easier to approximate the change in  by using a linear 
approximation. For  near   can be approximated by the linear approximation 

Therefore, if  is small, 

That is, 

In other words, the actual change in the function  if  increases from  to  is approximately the difference 
between  and  where  is the linear approximation of  at  By definition of  this difference is 
equal to  In summary, 

Therefore, we can use the differential  to approximate the change in  if  increases from  to 
 We can see this in the following graph. 

Figure 4.11 The differential  is used to approximate the actual change in  if  increases from  to 
We now take a look at how to use differentials to approximate the change in the value of the function that results from a 
small change in the value of the input. Note the calculation with differentials is much simpler than calculating actual 
values of functions and the result is very close to what we would obtain with the more exact calculation. 



314     4 • Applications of Derivatives

EXAMPLE 4.9 

Approximating Change with Differentials 
Let  Compute  and dy at  if 

Solution 
The actual change in  if  changes from  to  is given by 

The approximate change in  is given by  Since  we have 

 4.9 For  find  and  at  if 

Calculating the Amount of Error 
Any type of measurement is prone to a certain amount of error. In many applications, certain quantities are calculated 
based on measurements. For example, the area of a circle is calculated by measuring the radius of the circle. An error in 
the measurement of the radius leads to an error in the computed value of the area. Here we examine this type of error 
and study how differentials can be used to estimate the error. 
Consider a function  with an input that is a measured quantity. Suppose the exact value of the measured quantity is 
but the measured value is  We say the measurement error is dx (or  As a result, an error occurs in the 
calculated quantity  This type of error is known as a propagated error and is given by 

Since all measurements are prone to some degree of error, we do not know the exact value of a measured quantity, so 
we cannot calculate the propagated error exactly. However, given an estimate of the accuracy of a measurement, we can 
use differentials to approximate the propagated error  Specifically, if  is a differentiable function at  the 
propagated error is 

Unfortunately, we do not know the exact value  However, we can use the measured value  and estimate 

In the next example, we look at how differentials can be used to estimate the error in calculating the volume of a box if 
we assume the measurement of the side length is made with a certain amount of accuracy. 

EXAMPLE 4.10 

Volume of a Cube 
Suppose the side length of a cube is measured to be 5 cm with an accuracy of 0.1 cm. 
a. Use differentials to estimate the error in the computed volume of the cube. 
b. Compute the volume of the cube if the side length is (i) 4.9 cm and (ii) 5.1 cm to compare the estimated error with 

the actual potential error. 

Solution 
a. The measurement of the side length is accurate to within  cm. Therefore, 

The volume of a cube is given by  which leads to 

Using the measured side length of 5 cm, we can estimate that 

Access for free at openstax.org



4.2 • Linear Approximations and Differentials     315

Therefore, 

b. If the side length is actually 4.9 cm, then the volume of the cube is 

If the side length is actually 5.1 cm, then the volume of the cube is 

Therefore, the actual volume of the cube is between 117.649 and 132.651. Since the side length is measured to be 5 
cm, the computed volume is  Therefore, the error in the computed volume is 

That is, 

We see the estimated error  is relatively close to the actual potential error in the computed volume. 

 4.10 Estimate the error in the computed volume of a cube if the side length is measured to be 6 cm with an 
accuracy of 0.2 cm. 

The measurement error dx  and the propagated error  are absolute errors. We are typically interested in the 
size of an error relative to the size of the quantity being measured or calculated. Given an absolute error  for a 
particular quantity, we define the relative error as  where  is the actual value of the quantity. The percentage error 
is the relative error expressed as a percentage. For example, if we measure the height of a ladder to be 63 in. when the 
actual height is 62 in., the absolute error is 1 in. but the relative error is  or  By comparison, if we 
measure the width of a piece of cardboard to be 8.25 in. when the actual width is 8 in., our absolute error is  in., 
whereas the relative error is  or  Therefore, the percentage error in the measurement of the cardboard 
is larger, even though 0.25 in. is less than 1 in. 

EXAMPLE 4.11 

Relative and Percentage Error 
An astronaut using a camera measures the radius of Earth as 4000 mi with an error of  mi. Let’s use differentials to 
estimate the relative and percentage error of using this radius measurement to calculate the volume of Earth, assuming 
the planet is a perfect sphere. 

Solution 
If the measurement of the radius is accurate to within  we have 

Since the volume of a sphere is given by  we have 

Using the measured radius of 4000 mi, we can estimate 

To estimate the relative error, consider  Since we do not know the exact value of the volume  use the measured 
radius  to estimate  We obtain  Therefore the relative error satisfies 



316     4 • Applications of Derivatives

which simplifies to 

The relative error is 0.06 and the percentage error is 

 4.11 Determine the percentage error if the radius of Earth is measured to be 3950 mi with an error of  mi. 

 SECTION 4.2 EXERCISES 
46 . What is the linear  47 . Determine the necessary  48 . Explain why the linear 

approximation for any conditions such that the approximation becomes 
generic linear function linear approximation less accurate as you 

function is constant. Use a increase the distance 
graph to prove your result. between  and  Use a 

graph to prove your 
argument. 

49 . When is the linear 
approximation exact? 

For the following exercises, find the linear approximation  to  near  for the function. 

50 .  51 .  52 . 

53 .  54 .  55 . 

For the following exercises, compute the values given within 0.01 by deciding on the appropriate  and  and 
evaluating  Check your answer using a calculator. 

56 . [T]  57 . [T]  58 . [T] 

59 . [T]  60 . [T]  61 . [T] 

For the following exercises, determine the appropriate  and  and evaluate  Calculate 
the numerical error in the linear approximations that follow. 

62 . [T]  63 . [T]  64 . [T] 

65 . [T]  66 . [T]  67 . [T] 

For the following exercises, find the differential of the function. 

68 .  69 .  70 . 

71 . 

For the following exercises, find the differential and evaluate for the given  and 

72 .   73 .    74 .   

75 .   76 .   77 .  

Access for free at openstax.org



4.3 • Maxima and Minima     317

For the following exercises, find the change in volume  or in surface area 
78 .  if the sides of a cube  79 .  if the sides of a cube  80 .  if the radius of a sphere 

change from 10 to 10.1. change from  to changes from  by 
81 .  if the radius of a sphere  82 .  if a circular cylinder  83 .  if a circular cylinder of 

changes from  by with  changes height height 3 changes from 
from 3 cm to  to 

84 . A spherical golf ball is  85 . A pool has a rectangular  86 . An ice cream cone has 
measured to have a radius base of 10 ft by 20 ft and a height 4 in. and radius 1 in. 
of  with a possible depth of 6 ft. What is the If the cone is 0.1 in. thick, 
measurement error of change in volume if you what is the difference 

 What is the only fill it up to 5.5 ft? between the volume of the 
possible change in volume? cone, including the shell, 

and the volume of the ice 
cream you can fit inside 
the shell? 

For the following exercises, confirm the approximations by using the linear approximation at 

87 .  88 .  89 . 

4.3 Maxima and Minima 
Learning Objectives 

4.3.1 Define absolute extrema. 
4.3.2 Define local extrema. 
4.3.3 Explain how to find the critical points of a function over a closed interval. 
4.3.4 Describe how to use critical points to locate absolute extrema over a closed interval. 

Given a particular function, we are often interested in determining the largest and smallest values of the function. This 
information is important in creating accurate graphs. Finding the maximum and minimum values of a function also has 
practical significance because we can use this method to solve optimization problems, such as maximizing profit, 
minimizing the amount of material used in manufacturing an aluminum can, or finding the maximum height a rocket 
can reach. In this section, we look at how to use derivatives to find the largest and smallest values for a function. 

Absolute Extrema 
Consider the function  over the interval ∞ ∞  As ∞  ∞  Therefore, the function does not 
have a largest value. However, since  for all real numbers  and  when  the function has a 
smallest value, 1, when  We say that 1 is the absolute minimum of  and it occurs at  We say 
that  does not have an absolute maximum (see the following figure). 

Figure 4.12 The given function has an absolute minimum of 1 at  The function does not have an absolute 
maximum. 



318     4 • Applications of Derivatives

Definition 

Let  be a function defined over an interval  and let  We say  has an absolute maximum on  at  if 
 for all  We say  has an absolute minimum on  at  if  for all  If  has an 

absolute maximum on  at  or an absolute minimum on  at  we say  has an absolute extremum on  at 

Before proceeding, let’s note two important issues regarding this definition. First, the term absolute here does not refer 
to absolute value. An absolute extremum may be positive, negative, or zero. Second, if a function  has an absolute 
extremum over an interval  at  the absolute extremum is  The real number  is a point in the domain at which the 
absolute extremum occurs. For example, consider the function  over the interval ∞ ∞  Since 

for all real numbers  we say  has an absolute maximum over ∞ ∞  at  The absolute maximum is  It 
occurs at  as shown in Figure 4.13(b). 
A function may have both an absolute maximum and an absolute minimum, just one extremum, or neither. Figure 4.13 
shows several functions and some of the different possibilities regarding absolute extrema. However, the following 
theorem, called the Extreme Value Theorem, guarantees that a continuous function  over a closed, bounded interval 

 has both an absolute maximum and an absolute minimum. 

Access for free at openstax.org



4.3 • Maxima and Minima     319

Figure 4.13 Graphs (a), (b), and (c) show several possibilities for absolute extrema for functions with a domain of 
∞ ∞  Graphs (d), (e), and (f) show several possibilities for absolute extrema for functions with a domain that is a 

bounded interval. 

Theorem 4.1 

Extreme Value Theorem 
If  is a continuous function over the closed, bounded interval  then there is a point in  at which  has an 
absolute maximum over  and there is a point in  at which  has an absolute minimum over 

The proof of the extreme value theorem is beyond the scope of this text. Typically, it is proved in a course on real 
analysis. There are a couple of key points to note about the statement of this theorem. For the extreme value theorem to 
apply, the function must be continuous over a closed, bounded interval. If the interval  is open or the function has even 
one point of discontinuity, the function may not have an absolute maximum or absolute minimum over  For example, 
consider the functions shown in Figure 4.13(d), (e), and (f). All three of these functions are defined over bounded 
intervals. However, the function in graph (e) is the only one that has both an absolute maximum and an absolute 
minimum over its domain. The extreme value theorem cannot be applied to the functions in graphs (d) and (f) because 
neither of these functions is continuous over a closed, bounded interval. Although the function in graph (d) is defined 
over the closed interval  the function is discontinuous at  The function has an absolute maximum over 



320     4 • Applications of Derivatives

but does not have an absolute minimum. The function in graph (f) is continuous over the half-open interval  but is 
not defined at  and therefore is not continuous over a closed, bounded interval. The function has an absolute 
minimum over  but does not have an absolute maximum over  These two graphs illustrate why a function 
over a bounded interval may fail to have an absolute maximum and/or absolute minimum. 
Before looking at how to find absolute extrema, let’s examine the related concept of local extrema. This idea is useful in 
determining where absolute extrema occur. 

Local Extrema and Critical Points 
Consider the function  shown in Figure 4.14. The graph can be described as two mountains with a valley in the middle. 
The absolute maximum value of the function occurs at the higher peak, at  However,  is also a point of 
interest. Although  is not the largest value of  the value  is larger than  for all  near 0. We say  has a 
local maximum at  Similarly, the function  does not have an absolute minimum, but it does have a local minimum 
at  because  is less than  for  near 1. 

Figure 4.14 This function  has two local maxima and one local minimum. The local maximum at  is also the 
absolute maximum. 

Definition 

A function  has a local maximum at  if there exists an open interval  containing  such that  is contained in the 
domain of  and  for all  A function  has a local minimum at  if there exists an open interval 
containing  such that  is contained in the domain of  and  for all  A function  has a local 
extremum at  if  has a local maximum at  or  has a local minimum at 

Note that if  has an absolute extremum at  and  is defined over an interval containing  then  is also considered 
a local extremum. If an absolute extremum for a function  occurs at an endpoint, we do not consider that to be a local 
extremum, but instead refer to that as an endpoint extremum. 
Given the graph of a function  it is sometimes easy to see where a local maximum or local minimum occurs. However, 
it is not always easy to see, since the interesting features on the graph of a function may not be visible because they 
occur at a very small scale. Also, we may not have a graph of the function. In these cases, how can we use a formula for a 
function to determine where these extrema occur? 
To answer this question, let’s look at Figure 4.14 again. The local extrema occur at   and  Notice that at 

 and  the derivative  At  the derivative  does not exist, since the function  has a corner 
there. In fact, if  has a local extremum at a point  the derivative  must satisfy one of the following conditions: 
either  or  is undefined. Such a value  is known as a critical number and it is important in finding extreme 
values for functions. 

Access for free at openstax.org



4.3 • Maxima and Minima     321

Definition 

Let  be an interior point in the domain of  We say that  is a critical number of  if  or  is undefined. 
We call the point  a critical number of . Note that these two terms are often used interchangeably in this text 
and elsewhere. 

As mentioned earlier, if  has a local extremum at a point  then  must be a critical number of  This fact is known 
as Fermat’s theorem. 

Theorem 4.2 

Fermat’s Theorem 
If  has a local extremum at  and  is differentiable at  then 

Proof 
Suppose  has a local extremum at  and  is differentiable at  We need to show that  To do this, we will 
show that  and  and therefore  Since  has a local extremum at   has a local maximum 
or local minimum at  Suppose  has a local maximum at  The case in which  has a local minimum at  can be 
handled similarly. There then exists an open interval  such that  for all  Since  is differentiable at 
from the definition of the derivative, we know that 

Since this limit exists, both one-sided limits also exist and equal  Therefore, 

(4.4) 

and 

(4.5) 

Since  is a local maximum, we see that  for  near  Therefore, for  near  but  we have 
 From Equation 4.4 we conclude that  Similarly, it can be shown that  Therefore, 

□ 
From Fermat’s theorem, we conclude that if  has a local extremum at  then either  or  is undefined. In 
other words, local extrema can only occur at critical points. 
Note this theorem does not claim that a function  must have a local extremum at a critical point. Rather, it states that 
critical points are candidates for local extrema. For example, consider the function  We have 
when  Therefore,  is a critical number. However,  is increasing over ∞ ∞  and thus  does not 
have a local extremum at  In Figure 4.15, we see several different possibilities for critical points. In some of these 
cases, the functions have local extrema at critical points, whereas in other cases the functions do not. Note that these 
graphs do not show all possibilities for the behavior of a function at a critical point. 



322     4 • Applications of Derivatives

Figure 4.15 (a–e) A function  has a critical number at  if  or  is undefined. A function may or may not 
have a local extremum at a critical point. 
Later in this chapter we look at analytical methods for determining whether a function actually has a local extremum at a 
critical point. For now, let’s turn our attention to finding critical points. We will use graphical observations to determine 
whether a critical point is associated with a local extremum. 

EXAMPLE 4.12 

Locating Critical Points 
For each of the following functions, find all critical points. Use a graphing utility to determine whether the function has a 
local extremum at each of the critical points. 

a. 
b. 
c. 

Solution 
a. The derivative  is defined for all real numbers  Therefore, we only need to find the values for 

 where  Since  the critical numbers are  and  From 
the graph of  in Figure 4.16, we see that  has a local maximum at  and a local minimum at 

Figure 4.16 This function has a local maximum and a local minimum. 
b. Using the chain rule, we see the derivative is 

Access for free at openstax.org



4.3 • Maxima and Minima     323

Therefore,  has critical points when  and when  We conclude that the critical numbers are 
 From the graph of  in Figure 4.17, we see that  has a local (and absolute) minimum at  but does 

not have a local extremum at  or 

Figure 4.17 This function has three critical numbers:   and  The function has a local (and 
absolute) minimum at  but does not have extrema at the other two critical points. 

c. By the quotient rule, we see that the derivative is 

The derivative is defined everywhere. Therefore, we only need to find values for  where  Solving 
 we see that  which implies  Therefore, the critical numbers are  From the 

graph of  in Figure 4.18, we see that  has an absolute maximum at  and an absolute minimum at 
Hence,  has a local maximum at  and a local minimum at  (Note that if  has an absolute extremum 
over an interval  at a point  that is not an endpoint of  then  has a local extremum at 

Figure 4.18 This function has an absolute maximum and an absolute minimum. 

 4.12 Find all critical points for 

Locating Absolute Extrema 
The extreme value theorem states that a continuous function over a closed, bounded interval has an absolute maximum 
and an absolute minimum. As shown in Figure 4.13, one or both of these absolute extrema could occur at an endpoint. If 
an absolute extremum does not occur at an endpoint, however, it must occur at an interior point, in which case the 
absolute extremum is a local extremum. Therefore, by Fermat’s Theorem, the point  at which the local extremum occurs 
must be a critical point. We summarize this result in the following theorem. 



324     4 • Applications of Derivatives

Theorem 4.3 

Location of Absolute Extrema 
Let  be a continuous function over a closed, bounded interval  The absolute maximum of  over  and the 
absolute minimum of  over  must occur at endpoints of  or at critical points of  in 

With this idea in mind, let’s examine a procedure for locating absolute extrema. 

Problem-Solving Strategy 

Locating Absolute Extrema over a Closed Interval 
Consider a continuous function  defined over the closed interval 

1. Evaluate  at the endpoints  and 
2. Find all critical points of  that lie over the interval  and evaluate  at those critical points. 
3. Compare all values found in (1) and (2). From Location of Absolute Extrema, the absolute extrema must occur at 

endpoints or critical points. Therefore, the largest of these values is the absolute maximum of  The smallest of 
these values is the absolute minimum of 

Now let’s look at how to use this strategy to find the absolute maximum and absolute minimum values for continuous 
functions. 

EXAMPLE 4.13 

Locating Absolute Extrema 
For each of the following functions, find the absolute maximum and absolute minimum over the specified interval and 
state where those values occur. 

a.  over 
b.  over 

Solution 
a. Step 1. Evaluate  at the endpoints  and 

Step 2. Since   is defined for all real numbers  Therefore, there are no critical points where the 
derivative is undefined. It remains to check where  Since  at  and  is in the 
interval   is a candidate for an absolute extremum of  over  We evaluate  and find 

Step 3. We set up the following table to compare the values found in steps 1 and 2. 
Conclusion 

Absolute maximum 

Absolute minimum 

Access for free at openstax.org



4.3 • Maxima and Minima     325

From the table, we find that the absolute maximum of  over the interval [1, 3] is  and it occurs at  The 
absolute minimum of  over the interval [1, 3] is  and it occurs at  as shown in the following graph. 

Figure 4.19 This function has both an absolute maximum and an absolute minimum. 
b. Step 1. Evaluate  at the endpoints  and 

Step 2. The derivative of  is given by 

for  The derivative is zero when  which implies  The derivative is undefined at 
Therefore, the critical numbers of  are  The point  is an endpoint, so we already evaluated  in 
step 1. The point  is not in the interval of interest, so we need only evaluate  We find that 

Step 3. We compare the values found in steps 1 and 2, in the following table. 
Conclusion 

Absolute maximum 

Absolute minimum 

We conclude that the absolute maximum of  over the interval [0, 2] is zero, and it occurs at  The absolute 
minimum is −2, and it occurs at  as shown in the following graph. 



326     4 • Applications of Derivatives

Figure 4.20 This function has an absolute maximum at an endpoint of the interval. 

 4.13 Find the absolute maximum and absolute minimum of  over the interval 

At this point, we know how to locate absolute extrema for continuous functions over closed intervals. We have also 
defined local extrema and determined that if a function  has a local extremum at a point  then  must be a critical 
number of  However,  being a critical point is not a sufficient condition for  to have a local extremum at  Later in 
this chapter, we show how to determine whether a function actually has a local extremum at a critical point. First, 
however, we need to introduce the Mean Value Theorem, which will help as we analyze the behavior of the graph of a 
function. 

 SECTION 4.3 EXERCISES 
90 . In precalculus, you learned  91 . If you are finding an  92 . If you are examining a 

a formula for the position absolute minimum over an function over an interval 
of the maximum or interval  why do you  for  and  finite, is it 
minimum of a quadratic need to check the possible not to have an 
equation endpoints? Draw a graph absolute maximum or 
which was that supports your absolute minimum? 
Prove this formula using hypothesis. 
calculus. 

93 . When you are checking for  94 . Can you have a finite  95 . Can you have a finite 
critical points, explain why absolute maximum for absolute maximum for 
you also need to determine  over 
points where  is ∞ ∞  Explain why or over ∞ ∞  assuming a 
undefined. Draw a graph 
to support your why not using graphical is non-zero? Explain why or 
explanation. arguments. why not using graphical 

arguments. 
96 . Let  be the number of  97 . Is it possible to have more  98 . Is it possible to have no 

local minima and  be the than one absolute absolute minimum or 
number of local maxima. maximum? Use a graphical maximum for a function? If 
Can you create a function argument to prove your so, construct such a 
where  Draw a hypothesis. function. If not, explain 
graph to support your why this is not possible. 
explanation. 

Access for free at openstax.org



4.3 • Maxima and Minima     327

99 . [T] Graph the function 
 For which values 

of  on any infinite 
domain, will you have an 
absolute minimum and 
absolute maximum? 

For the following exercises, determine where the local and absolute maxima and minima occur on the graph given. 
Assume the graph represents the entirety of each function. For any extrema located at an endpoint, approximate the x-
value. 
100.  101 . 

102.  103 . 

For the following problems, draw graphs of  which is continuous, over the interval  with the following 
properties: 
104. Absolute maximum at  105 . Absolute minimum at  106 . Absolute maximum at 

 and absolute  and absolute  absolute minimum 
minima at maximum at at  local 

maximum at  and 
a critical point that is not 
a maximum or minimum 
at 

107. Absolute maxima at 
and  local 
minimum at  and 
absolute minimum at 

For the following exercises, find the critical numbers in the domains of the following functions. 

108.  109 .  110 . 

111.  112 .  113 . 

114.  115 .  116 . 

117. 



328     4 • Applications of Derivatives

For the following exercises, find the local and/or absolute extrema for the functions over the specified domain. 

118.  over  119 .  over  120 .  over 

121.  over  122 .  over  123 .  over 

124.  over  125 .  over  126 .  over 

127.  over  128 .  over 

For the following exercises, find the local and absolute minima and maxima for the functions over ∞ ∞

129.  130 .  131 . 

132.  133 .  134 . 

For the following functions, use a calculator to graph the function and to estimate the absolute and local maxima and 
minima. Then, solve for them explicitly. 

135. [T]  136 . [T] 

137. [T]  138 . [T] 

139. [T]  140 . A company that produces  141 . A ball is thrown into the air 
cell phones has a cost and its position is given by 
function of 

Find the height at which 
where  is cost in dollars the ball stops ascending. 
and  is number of cell How long after it is thrown 
phones produced (in does this happen? 
thousands). How many 
units of cell phone (in 
thousands) minimizes this 
cost function? 

Access for free at openstax.org



4.4 • The Mean Value Theorem     329

For the following exercises, consider the production of gold during the California gold rush (1848–1888). The production 
of gold can be modeled by  where  is the number of years since the rush began  and  is 

ounces of gold produced (in millions). A summary of the data is shown in the following figure. 

 142 . Find when the maximum 
(local and absolute) gold 
production occurred, and 
the amount of gold 
produced during that 
maximum. 

143. Find when the minimum 
(local and absolute) gold 
production occurred. 
What was the amount of 
gold produced during this 
minimum? 

Find the critical points, maxima, and minima for the following piecewise functions. 

144.  145 . 

For the following exercises, find the critical points of the following generic functions. Are they maxima, minima, or 
neither? State the necessary conditions. 

146.  given  147 .  given that 
that  and a is an integer. 

4.4 The Mean Value Theorem 
Learning Objectives 

4.4.1 Explain the meaning of Rolle’s theorem. 
4.4.2 Describe the significance of the Mean Value Theorem. 
4.4.3 State three important consequences of the Mean Value Theorem. 

The Mean Value Theorem is one of the most important theorems in calculus. We look at some of its implications at the 
end of this section. First, let’s start with a special case of the Mean Value Theorem, called Rolle’s theorem. 

Rolle’s Theorem 
Informally, Rolle’s theorem states that if the outputs of a differentiable function  are equal at the endpoints of an 
interval, then there must be an interior point  where  Figure 4.21 illustrates this theorem. 



330     4 • Applications of Derivatives

Figure 4.21 If a differentiable function f satisfies  then its derivative must be zero at some point(s) between 
and 

Theorem 4.4 

Rolle’s Theorem 
Let  be a continuous function over the closed interval  and differentiable over the open interval  such that 

 There then exists at least one  such that 

Proof 
Let  We consider three cases: 
1.  for all 
2. There exists  such that 
3. There exists  such that 

Case 1: If  for all  then  for all 
Case 2: Since  is a continuous function over the closed, bounded interval  by the extreme value theorem, it has an 
absolute maximum. Also, since there is a point  such that  the absolute maximum is greater than 
Therefore, the absolute maximum does not occur at either endpoint. As a result, the absolute maximum must occur at 
an interior point  Because  has a maximum at an interior point  and  is differentiable at  by Fermat’s 
theorem, 
Case 3: The case when there exists a point  such that  is analogous to case 2, with maximum replaced 
by minimum. 
□ 
An important point about Rolle’s theorem is that the differentiability of the function  is critical. If  is not differentiable, 
even at a single point, the result may not hold. For example, the function  is continuous over  and 

 but  for any  as shown in the following figure. 

Figure 4.22 Since  is not differentiable at  the conditions of Rolle’s theorem are not satisfied. In fact, 
the conclusion does not hold here; there is no  such that 

Access for free at openstax.org



4.4 • The Mean Value Theorem     331

Let’s now consider functions that satisfy the conditions of Rolle’s theorem and calculate explicitly the points  where 

EXAMPLE 4.14 

Using Rolle’s Theorem 
For each of the following functions, verify that the function satisfies the criteria stated in Rolle’s theorem and find all 
values  in the given interval where 

a.  over 
b.  over 

Solution 
a. Since  is a polynomial, it is continuous and differentiable everywhere. In addition,  Therefore, 

satisfies the criteria of Rolle’s theorem. We conclude that there exists at least one value  such that 
 Since  we see that  implies  as shown in the 

following graph. 

Figure 4.23 This function is continuous and differentiable over   when 
b. As in part a.  is a polynomial and therefore is continuous and differentiable everywhere. Also, 

That said,  satisfies the criteria of Rolle’s theorem. Differentiating, we find that  Therefore, 
 when  Both points are in the interval  and, therefore, both points satisfy the conclusion 

of Rolle’s theorem as shown in the following graph. 



332     4 • Applications of Derivatives

Figure 4.24 For this polynomial over   at 

 4.14 Verify that the function  defined over the interval  satisfies the conditions of 
Rolle’s theorem. Find all points  guaranteed by Rolle’s theorem. 

The Mean Value Theorem and Its Meaning 
Rolle’s theorem is a special case of the Mean Value Theorem. In Rolle’s theorem, we consider differentiable functions 
defined on a closed interval  with . The Mean Value Theorem generalizes Rolle’s theorem by considering 
functions that do not necessarily have equal value at the endpoints. Consequently, we can view the Mean Value Theorem 
as a slanted version of Rolle’s theorem (Figure 4.25). The Mean Value Theorem states that if  is continuous over the 
closed interval  and differentiable over the open interval  then there exists a point  such that the 
tangent line to the graph of  at  is parallel to the secant line connecting  and 

Figure 4.25 The Mean Value Theorem says that for a function that meets its conditions, at some point the tangent line 
has the same slope as the secant line between the ends. For this function, there are two values  and  such that the 
tangent line to  at  and  has the same slope as the secant line. 

Access for free at openstax.org



4.4 • The Mean Value Theorem     333

Theorem 4.5 

Mean Value Theorem 
Let  be continuous over the closed interval  and differentiable over the open interval  Then, there exists at 
least one point  such that 

Proof 
The proof follows from Rolle’s theorem by introducing an appropriate function that satisfies the criteria of Rolle’s 
theorem. Consider the line connecting  and  Since the slope of that line is 

and the line passes through the point  the equation of that line can be written as 

Let  denote the vertical difference between the point  and the point  on that line. Therefore, 

Figure 4.26 The value  is the vertical difference between the point  and the point  on the secant line 
connecting  and 
Since the graph of  intersects the secant line when  and  we see that  Since  is a 
differentiable function over   is also a differentiable function over  Furthermore, since  is continuous over 

  is also continuous over  Therefore,  satisfies the criteria of Rolle’s theorem. Consequently, there exists a 
point  such that  Since 

we see that 

Since  we conclude that 

□ 



334     4 • Applications of Derivatives

EXAMPLE 4.15 

Verifying that the Mean Value Theorem Applies 
For  over the interval  show that  satisfies the hypothesis of the Mean Value Theorem, and therefore 
there exists at least one value  such that  is equal to the slope of the line connecting  and 

 Find these values  guaranteed by the Mean Value Theorem. 

Solution 
We know that  is continuous over  and differentiable over  Therefore,  satisfies the hypotheses of 
the Mean Value Theorem, and there must exist at least one value  such that  is equal to the slope of the 
line connecting  and  (Figure 4.27). To determine which value(s) of  are guaranteed, first calculate the 
derivative of  The derivative  The slope of the line connecting  and  is given by 

We want to find  such that  That is, we want to find  such that 

Solving this equation for  we obtain  At this point, the slope of the tangent line equals the slope of the line 
joining the endpoints. 

Figure 4.27 The slope of the tangent line at  is the same as the slope of the line segment connecting  and 

One application that helps illustrate the Mean Value Theorem involves velocity. For example, suppose we drive a car for 1 
h down a straight road with an average velocity of 45 mph. Let  and  denote the position and velocity of the car, 
respectively, for  h. Assuming that the position function  is differentiable, we can apply the Mean Value 
Theorem to conclude that, at some time  the speed of the car was exactly 

Access for free at openstax.org



4.4 • The Mean Value Theorem     335

EXAMPLE 4.16 

Mean Value Theorem and Velocity 
If a rock is dropped from a height of 100 ft, its position  seconds after it is dropped until it hits the ground is given by the 
function 
a. Determine how long it takes before the rock hits the ground. 
b. Find the average velocity  of the rock for when the rock is released and the rock hits the ground. 
c. Find the time  guaranteed by the Mean Value Theorem when the instantaneous velocity of the rock is 

Solution 
a. When the rock hits the ground, its position is  Solving the equation  for  we find that 

 Since we are only considering  the ball will hit the ground  sec after it is dropped. 
b. The average velocity is given by 

c. The instantaneous velocity is given by the derivative of the position function. Therefore, we need to find a time 
such that  Since  is continuous over the interval  and differentiable over 
the interval  by the Mean Value Theorem, there is guaranteed to be a point  such that 

Taking the derivative of the position function  we find that  Therefore, the equation reduces to 
 Solving this equation for  we have  Therefore,  sec after the rock is dropped, the 

instantaneous velocity equals the average velocity of the rock during its free fall:  ft/sec. 

Figure 4.28 At time  sec, the velocity of the rock is equal to its average velocity from the time it is dropped 
until it hits the ground. 

 4.15 Suppose a ball is dropped from a height of 200 ft. Its position at time  is  Find the time 
 when the instantaneous velocity of the ball equals its average velocity. 

Corollaries of the Mean Value Theorem 
Let’s now look at three corollaries of the Mean Value Theorem. These results have important consequences, which we 
use in upcoming sections. 
At this point, we know the derivative of any constant function is zero. The Mean Value Theorem allows us to conclude 
that the converse is also true. In particular, if  for all  in some interval  then  is constant over that 
interval. This result may seem intuitively obvious, but it has important implications that are not obvious, and we discuss 
them shortly. 



336     4 • Applications of Derivatives

Theorem 4.6 

Corollary 1: Functions with a Derivative of Zero 
Let  be differentiable over an interval  If  for all  then  constant for all 

Proof 
Since  is differentiable over   must be continuous over  Suppose  is not constant for all  in  Then there exist 

 where  and  Choose the notation so that  Therefore, 

Since  is a differentiable function, by the Mean Value Theorem, there exists  such that 

Therefore, there exists  such that  which contradicts the assumption that  for all 
□ 
From Corollary 1: Functions with a Derivative of Zero, it follows that if two functions have the same derivative, they differ 
by, at most, a constant. 

Theorem 4.7 

Corollary 2: Constant Difference Theorem 
If  and  are differentiable over an interval  and  for all  then  for some 
constant 

Proof 
Let  Then,  for all  By Corollary 1, there is a constant  such that 

 for all  Therefore,  for all 
□ 
This fact is important because it means that for a given function  if there exists a function  such that 
then, the only other functions that have a derivative equal to  are  for some constant  We discuss this result 
in more detail later in the chapter. 
The third corollary of the Mean Value Theorem discusses when a function is increasing and when it is decreasing. Recall 
that a function  is increasing over  if  whenever  whereas  is decreasing over  if 

 whenever  Using the Mean Value Theorem, we can show that if the derivative of a function is 
positive, then the function is increasing; if the derivative is negative, then the function is decreasing (Figure 4.29). We 
make use of this fact in the next section, where we show how to use the derivative of a function to locate local maximum 
and minimum values of the function, and how to determine the shape of the graph. 

Access for free at openstax.org



4.4 • The Mean Value Theorem     337

Figure 4.29 If a function has a positive derivative over some interval  then the function increases over that interval  if 
the derivative is negative over some interval  then the function decreases over that interval 

Theorem 4.8 

Corollary 3: Increasing and Decreasing Functions 
Let  be continuous over the closed interval  and differentiable over the open interval 

i. If  for all  then  is an increasing function over 
ii. If  for all  then  is a decreasing function over 

Proof 
We will prove i.; the proof of ii. is similar. Suppose  is continuous and differentiable over an interval  and  for 
all . By way of contradiction, suppose that  is not an increasing function on . Then there exist  and  in  such 
that , but . Since  is a differentiable function over , the Mean Value Theorem guarantees that there is 
some value  such that 

Now , so . Because , it follows that . It follows that the quotient of  and 
 is negative. So, for c, 

However,  for all  including . This is a contradiction. The assumption that  is not an increasing function 
on  is false. Therefore,  must be increasing throughout . 
□ 

 SECTION 4.4 EXERCISES 
148. Why do you need  149 . Why do you need  150 . When are Rolle’s theorem 

continuity to apply the differentiability to apply and the Mean Value 
Mean Value Theorem? the Mean Value Theorem? Theorem equivalent? 
Construct a Find a counterexample. 
counterexample. 

151. If you have a function with a 
discontinuity, is it still 
possible to have 

Draw such an example or 
prove why not. 



338     4 • Applications of Derivatives

For the following exercises, determine over what intervals (if any) the Mean Value Theorem applies. Justify your answer. 

152.  153 .  154 . 

155.  156 . 

For the following exercises, graph the functions on a calculator and draw the secant line that connects the endpoints. 
Estimate the number of points  such that 

157. [T]  over  158 . [T]  over  159 . [T]  over 

160. [T] 

over 

For the following exercises, find all points  predicted by the Mean Value Theorem satisfying 

161.  162 .  163 . 

164.  165 .  166 . 

For the following exercises, show there is no  such that  Explain why the Mean Value 
Theorem does not apply over the interval 

167.  168 .  169 . 

170.  (Hint: This is 
called the floor function 
and it is defined so that 

 is the largest integer 
less than or equal to 

For the following exercises, determine whether the Mean Value Theorem applies for the functions over the given interval 
 Justify your answer. 

171.  over  172 .  over  173 .  over 

174.  over  175 .  over  176 .  over 

177.  over  178 .  over  179 .  over 

180.  over  181 .  over 

For the following exercises, consider the roots of the equation. 
182. Show that the equation  183 . Find the conditions for  184 . Find the conditions for 

 has exactly one root (double  to have one 
exactly one real root. root) for the equation root. Is it possible to have 
What is it? more than one root? 

For the following exercises, use a calculator to graph the function over the interval  and graph the secant line from 
 to  Use the calculator to estimate all values of  as guaranteed by the Mean Value Theorem. Then, find the exact value 

of  if possible, or write the final equation and use a calculator to estimate to four digits. 

185. [T]  over  186 . [T]  over  187 . [T]  over 

Access for free at openstax.org



4.5 • Derivatives and the Shape of a Graph     339

188. [T]  over  189 . [T]  over  190 . At 10:17 a.m., you pass a 
police car at 55 mph that 
is stopped on the freeway. 
You pass a second police 
car at 55 mph at 10:53 
a.m., which is located 39 
mi from the first police 
car. If the speed limit is 60 
mph, can the police cite 
you for speeding? 

191. Two cars drive from one  192 . Show that  and  193 . Show that  and 
stoplight to the next,  have the same  have the same 
leaving at the same time derivative. What can you derivative. What can you 
and arriving at the same say about say about 
time. Is there ever a time 
when they are going the 
same speed? Prove or 
disprove. 

4.5 Derivatives and the Shape of a Graph 
Learning Objectives 

4.5.1 Explain how the sign of the first derivative affects the shape of a function’s graph. 
4.5.2 State the first derivative test for critical points. 
4.5.3 Use concavity and inflection points to explain how the sign of the second derivative affects the shape of 

a function’s graph. 
4.5.4 Explain the concavity test for a function over an open interval. 
4.5.5 Explain the relationship between a function and its first and second derivatives. 
4.5.6 State the second derivative test for local extrema. 

Earlier in this chapter we stated that if a function  has a local extremum at a point  then  must be a critical point of 
However, a function is not guaranteed to have a local extremum at a critical point. For example,  has a critical 
point at  since  is zero at  but  does not have a local extremum at  Using the results from 
the previous section, we are now able to determine whether a critical point of a function actually corresponds to a local 
extreme value. In this section, we also see how the second derivative provides information about the shape of a graph by 
describing whether the graph of a function curves upward or curves downward. 

The First Derivative Test 
Corollary  of the Mean Value Theorem showed that if the derivative of a function is positive over an interval  then the 
function is increasing over  On the other hand, if the derivative of the function is negative over an interval  then the 
function is decreasing over  as shown in the following figure. 



340     4 • Applications of Derivatives

Figure 4.30 Both functions are increasing over the interval  At each point  the derivative  Both 
functions are decreasing over the interval  At each point  the derivative 
A continuous function  has a local maximum at point  if and only if  switches from increasing to decreasing at point 
Similarly,  has a local minimum at  if and only if  switches from decreasing to increasing at  If  is a continuous 
function over an interval  containing  and differentiable over  except possibly at  the only way  can switch from 
increasing to decreasing (or vice versa) at point  is if  changes sign as  increases through  If  is differentiable at 
the only way that  can change sign as  increases through  is if  Therefore, for a function  that is 
continuous over an interval  containing  and differentiable over  except possibly at  the only way  can switch from 
increasing to decreasing (or vice versa) is if  or  is undefined. Consequently, to locate local extrema for a 
function  we look for points  in the domain of  such that  or  is undefined. Recall that such points are 
called critical points of 
Note that  need not have local extrema at a critical point. The critical points are candidates for local extrema only. In 
Figure 4.31, we show that if a continuous function  has a local extremum, it must occur at a critical point, but a function 
may not have a local extremum at a critical point. We show that if  has a local extremum at a critical point, then the sign 
of  switches as  increases through that point. 

Figure 4.31 The function  has four critical points:  The function  has local maxima at  and  and a local 

Access for free at openstax.org



4.5 • Derivatives and the Shape of a Graph     341

minimum at  The function  does not have a local extremum at  The sign of  changes at all local extrema. 
Using Figure 4.31, we summarize the main results regarding local extrema. 

• If a continuous function  has a local extremum, it must occur at a critical point 
• The function has a local extremum at the critical point  if and only if the derivative  switches sign as  increases 

through 
• Therefore, to test whether a function has a local extremum at a critical point  we must determine the sign of 

to the left and right of 
This result is known as the first derivative test. 

Theorem 4.9 

First Derivative Test 
Suppose that  is a continuous function over an interval  containing a critical point  If  is differentiable over 
except possibly at point  then  satisfies one of the following descriptions: 

i. If  changes sign from positive when  to negative when  then  is a local maximum of 
ii. If  changes sign from negative when  to positive when  then  is a local minimum of 
iii. If  has the same sign for  and  then  is neither a local maximum nor a local minimum of 

We can summarize the first derivative test as a strategy for locating local extrema. 

Problem-Solving Strategy 

Using the First Derivative Test 
Consider a function  that is continuous over an interval 

1. Find all critical points of  and divide the interval  into smaller intervals using the critical points as endpoints. 
2. Analyze the sign of  in each of the subintervals. If  is continuous over a given subinterval (which is typically 

the case), then the sign of  in that subinterval does not change and, therefore, can be determined by choosing 
an arbitrary test point  in that subinterval and by evaluating the sign of  at that test point. Use the sign 
analysis to determine whether  is increasing or decreasing over that interval. 
Note: If  is not continuous throughout , then include points of discontinuity along with critical points as 
endpoints when dividing  into subintervals. 

3. Use First Derivative Test and the results of step  to determine whether  has a local maximum, a local minimum, 
or neither at each of the critical points. 

Now let’s look at how to use this strategy to locate all local extrema for particular functions. 

EXAMPLE 4.17 

Using the First Derivative Test to Find Local Extrema 
Use the first derivative test to find the location of all local extrema for  Use a graphing utility 
to confirm your results. 

Solution 
Step 1. The derivative is  To find the critical points, we need to find where  Factoring the 
polynomial, we conclude that the critical points must satisfy 

Therefore, the critical points are  Now divide the interval ∞ ∞  into the smaller intervals 

∞ ∞
Step 2. Since  is a continuous function, to determine the sign of  over each subinterval, it suffices to choose a 



342     4 • Applications of Derivatives

point over each of the intervals ∞ ∞  and determine the sign of  at each of these points. For 
example, let’s choose  as test points. 

Interval Test Point Sign of  at Test Point Conclusion 

∞  is increasing. 

 is decreasing. 

∞  is increasing. 

Step 3. Since  switches sign from positive to negative as  increases through  has a local maximum at 
Since  switches sign from negative to positive as  increases through  has a local minimum at  These 
analytical results agree with the following graph. 

Figure 4.32 The function  has a maximum at  and a minimum at 

 4.16 Use the first derivative test to locate all local extrema for 

Access for free at openstax.org



4.5 • Derivatives and the Shape of a Graph     343

EXAMPLE 4.18 

Using the First Derivative Test 
Use the first derivative test to find the location of all local extrema for  Use a graphing utility to 
confirm your results. 

Solution 
Step 1. The derivative is 

The derivative  when  Therefore,  at  The derivative  is undefined at 
Therefore, we have three critical points:   and  Consequently, divide the interval ∞ ∞  into the 

smaller intervals ∞  and ∞
Step 2: Since  is continuous over each subinterval, it suffices to choose a test point  in each of the intervals from step 

 and determine the sign of  at each of these points. The points  are test points for 
these intervals. 

Interval Test Point Sign of  at Test Point Conclusion 

∞  is decreasing. 

 is increasing. 

 is increasing. 

∞  is decreasing. 

Step 3: Since  is decreasing over the interval ∞  and increasing over the interval   has a local minimum 
at  Since  is increasing over the interval  and the interval   does not have a local extremum at 

 Since  is increasing over the interval  and decreasing over the interval ∞  has a local maximum at 
 The analytical results agree with the following graph. 

Figure 4.33 The function f has a local minimum at  and a local maximum at 

 4.17 Use the first derivative test to find all local extrema for 



344     4 • Applications of Derivatives

Concavity and Points of Inflection 
We now know how to determine where a function is increasing or decreasing. However, there is another issue to 
consider regarding the shape of the graph of a function. If the graph curves, does it curve upward or curve downward? 
This notion is called the concavity of the function. 
Figure 4.34(a) shows a function  with a graph that curves upward. As  increases, the slope of the tangent line 
increases. Thus, since the derivative increases as  increases,  is an increasing function. We say this function  is 
concave up. Figure 4.34(b) shows a function  that curves downward. As  increases, the slope of the tangent line 
decreases. Since the derivative decreases as  increases,  is a decreasing function. We say this function  is concave 
down. 

Definition 

Let  be a function that is differentiable over an open interval  If  is increasing over  we say  is concave up 
over  If  is decreasing over  we say  is concave down over 

Figure 4.34 (a), (c) Since  is increasing over the interval  we say  is concave up over  (b), (d) Since  is 
decreasing over the interval  we say  is concave down over 
In general, without having the graph of a function  how can we determine its concavity? By definition, a function  is 
concave up if  is increasing. From Corollary  we know that if  is a differentiable function, then  is increasing if its 
derivative  Therefore, a function  that is twice differentiable is concave up when  Similarly, a 
function  is concave down if  is decreasing. We know that a differentiable function  is decreasing if its derivative 

 Therefore, a twice-differentiable function  is concave down when  Applying this logic is known as 
the concavity test. 

Access for free at openstax.org



4.5 • Derivatives and the Shape of a Graph     345

Theorem 4.10 

Test for Concavity 
Let  be a function that is twice differentiable over an interval 

i. If  for all  then  is concave up over 
ii. If  for all  then  is concave down over 

We conclude that we can determine the concavity of a function  by looking at the second derivative of  In addition, 
we observe that a function  can switch concavity (Figure 4.35). However, a continuous function can switch concavity only 
at a point  if  or  is undefined. Consequently, to determine the intervals where a function  is concave 
up and concave down, we look for those values of  where  or  is undefined. When we have determined 
these points, we divide the domain of  into smaller intervals and determine the sign of  over each of these smaller 
intervals. If  changes sign as we pass through a point  then  changes concavity. It is important to remember that a 
function  may not change concavity at a point  even if  or  is undefined. If, however,  does change 
concavity at a point  and  is continuous at  we say the point  is an inflection point of 

Definition 

If  is continuous at  and  changes concavity at  the point  is an inflection point of 

Figure 4.35 Since  for  the function  is concave up over the interval ∞  Since  for 

 the function  is concave down over the interval ∞  The point  is an inflection point of 

EXAMPLE 4.19 

Testing for Concavity 
For the function  determine all intervals where  is concave up and all intervals where  is 
concave down. List all inflection points for  Use a graphing utility to confirm your results. 

Solution 
To determine concavity, we need to find the second derivative  The first derivative is  so 
the second derivative is  If the function changes concavity, it occurs either when  or  is 
undefined. Since  is defined for all real numbers  we need only find where  Solving the equation 

 we see that  is the only place where  could change concavity. We now test points over the intervals 
∞  and ∞  to determine the concavity of  The points  and  are test points for these intervals. 



346     4 • Applications of Derivatives

Interval Test Point Sign of  at Test Point Conclusion 

∞  is concave down 

∞  is concave up. 

We conclude that  is concave down over the interval ∞  and concave up over the interval ∞  Since 
changes concavity at  the point  is an inflection point. Figure 4.36 confirms the analytical results. 

Figure 4.36 The given function has a point of inflection at  where the graph changes concavity. 

 4.18 For  find all intervals where  is concave up and all intervals where  is concave 
down. 

We now summarize, in Table 4.1, the information that the first and second derivatives of a function  provide about the 
graph of  and illustrate this information in Figure 4.37. 

Sign of Sign of Is  increasing or decreasing? Concavity 

Positive Positive Increasing Concave up 

Positive Negative Increasing Concave down 

Negative Positive Decreasing Concave up 

Negative Negative Decreasing Concave down 

Table 4.1 What Derivatives Tell Us about Graphs 

Access for free at openstax.org



4.5 • Derivatives and the Shape of a Graph     347

Figure 4.37 Consider a twice-differentiable function  over an open interval  If  for all  the function is 
increasing over  If  for all  the function is decreasing over  If  for all  the function is 
concave up. If  for all  the function is concave down on 

The Second Derivative Test 
The first derivative test provides an analytical tool for finding local extrema, but the second derivative can also be used to 
locate extreme values. Using the second derivative can sometimes be a simpler method than using the first derivative. 
We know that if a continuous function has local extrema, it must occur at a critical point. However, a function need not 
have local extrema at a critical point. Here we examine how the second derivative test can be used to determine 
whether a function has a local extremum at a critical point. Let  be a twice-differentiable function such that 
and  is continuous over an open interval  containing  Suppose  Since  is continuous over 

 for all  (Figure 4.38). Then, by Corollary   is a decreasing function over  Since  we 
conclude that for all  if  and  if  Therefore, by the first derivative test,  has a local 
maximum at  On the other hand, suppose there exists a point  such that  but  Since  is 
continuous over an open interval  containing  then  for all  (Figure 4.38). Then, by Corollary  is an 
increasing function over  Since  we conclude that for all   if  and  if 
Therefore, by the first derivative test,  has a local minimum at 

Figure 4.38 Consider a twice-differentiable function  such that  is continuous. Since  and  there 
is an interval  containing  such that for all  in   is increasing if  and  is decreasing if  As a result,  has 
a local maximum at  Since  and  there is an interval  containing  such that for all  in   is 
decreasing if  and  is increasing if  As a result,  has a local minimum at 



348     4 • Applications of Derivatives

Theorem 4.11 

Second Derivative Test 
Suppose  is continuous over an interval containing 

i. If  then  has a local minimum at 
ii. If  then  has a local maximum at 
iii. If  then the test is inconclusive. 

Note that for case iii. when  then  may have a local maximum, local minimum, or neither at  For example, 
the functions   and  all have critical points at  In each case, the second derivative 
is zero at  However, the function  has a local minimum at  whereas the function  has a 
local maximum at  and the function  does not have a local extremum at 
Let’s now look at how to use the second derivative test to determine whether  has a local maximum or local minimum 
at a critical point  where 

EXAMPLE 4.20 

Using the Second Derivative Test 
Use the second derivative to find the location of all local extrema for 

Solution 
To apply the second derivative test, we first need to find critical points  where  The derivative is 

 Therefore,  when 

To determine whether  has local extrema at any of these points, we need to evaluate the sign of  at these points. The 
second derivative is 

In the following table, we evaluate the second derivative at each of the critical points and use the second derivative test 
to determine whether  has a local maximum or local minimum at any of these points. 

Conclusion 

Local maximum 

Second derivative test is inconclusive 

Local minimum 

By the second derivative test, we conclude that  has a local maximum at  and  has a local minimum at 
 The second derivative test is inconclusive at  To determine whether  has local extrema at  we 

apply the first derivative test. To evaluate the sign of  for  and  let 
 and  be the two test points. Since  and  we conclude that  is decreasing on both 

intervals and, therefore,  does not have local extrema at  as shown in the following graph. 

Access for free at openstax.org



4.5 • Derivatives and the Shape of a Graph     349

Figure 4.39 The function  has a local maximum at  and a local minimum at 

 4.19 Consider the function  The points  satisfy  Use the second 
derivative test to determine whether  has a local maximum or local minimum at those points. 

We have now developed the tools we need to determine where a function is increasing and decreasing, as well as 
acquired an understanding of the basic shape of the graph. In the next section we discuss what happens to a function as 

∞  At that point, we have enough tools to provide accurate graphs of a large variety of functions. 

 SECTION 4.5 EXERCISES 
194. If  is a critical point of  195 . For the function  is  196 . For the function  is 

 when is there no  both an inflection  an inflection point? 
local maximum or point and a local 
minimum at  Explain. maximum/minimum? 

197. Is it possible for a point  198 . Why do you need  199 . Explain whether a 
to be both an inflection continuity for the first concave-down function 
point and a local derivative test? Come up has to cross  for 
extremum of a twice with an example. some value of 
differentiable function? 

200. Explain whether a 
polynomial of degree 
can have an inflection 
point. 



350     4 • Applications of Derivatives

For the following exercises, analyze the graphs of  then list all intervals where  is increasing or decreasing. 
201.  202 . 

203.  204 . 

205. 

For the following exercises, analyze the graphs of  then list all intervals where 
a.  is increasing and decreasing and 
b. the minima and maxima are located. 

Access for free at openstax.org



4.5 • Derivatives and the Shape of a Graph     351

206.  207 . 

208.  209 . 

210. 



352     4 • Applications of Derivatives

For the following exercises, analyze the graphs of  then list all inflection points and intervals where  is concave up 
and concave down. 
211.  212 .  213 . 

214.  215 . 

For the following exercises, draw a graph that satisfies the given specifications for the domain  The function 
does not have to be continuous or differentiable. 
216.  over  217 .  over 

over over 
for all 

218.  over  219 . There is a local maximum 
at  local minimum 

local maximum at  local minima at at  and the graph is 
neither concave up nor 
concave down. 

220. There are local maxima at 
 the function is 

concave up for all  and 
the function remains 
positive for all 

For the following exercises, determine 
a. intervals where  is increasing or decreasing and 
b. local minima and maxima of 

Access for free at openstax.org



4.5 • Derivatives and the Shape of a Graph     353

If needed, use a calculator to graph the functions, but show your work. 

221.  over  222 . 

For the following exercises, determine a. intervals where  is concave up or concave down, and b. the inflection points of 

223. 

For the following exercises, determine 
a. intervals where  is increasing or decreasing, 
b. local minima and maxima of 
c. intervals where  is concave up and concave down, and 
d. the inflection points of 

224.  225 .  226 . 

227.  228 .  229 . 

230. 

For the following exercises, determine 
a. intervals where  is increasing or decreasing, 
b. local minima and maxima of 
c. intervals where  is concave up and concave down, and 
d. the inflection points of  Sketch the curve, then use a calculator to compare your answer. If you cannot determine the 

exact answer analytically, use a calculator. 
231. [T]  232 . [T]  233 . [T] 

over over 
over 

234. [T]  235 . [T]  236 . [T]  over 

237.  over  238 .  239 . 

240. 

For the following exercises, interpret the sentences in terms of 
241. The population is growing  242 . A bike accelerates faster,  243 . The airplane lands 

more slowly. Here  is the but a car goes faster. Here smoothly. Here  is the 
population.  Bike’s position minus plane’s altitude. 

Car’s position. 
244. A company tracks labor  245 . The economy is picking 

costs over the course of a up speed. Here  is a 
year. On July 1, costs are measure of the economy, 
at their peak. Here such as GDP. 
represents the cost of 
labor. 

For the following exercises, consider a third-degree polynomial  which has the properties 
(not applicable to Exercises 249 and 250). Determine whether the following statements are true or false. Justify your 
answer. 
246.  for some  247 .  for some  248 . There is no absolute 

maximum at 



354     4 • Applications of Derivatives

249. If  has three roots,  250 . If  has one inflection 
then it has  inflection point, then it has three 
point. real roots. 

4.6 Limits at Infinity and Asymptotes 
Learning Objectives 

4.6.1 Calculate the limit of a function as  increases or decreases without bound. 
4.6.2 Recognize a horizontal asymptote on the graph of a function. 
4.6.3 Estimate the end behavior of a function as  increases or decreases without bound. 
4.6.4 Recognize an oblique asymptote on the graph of a function. 
4.6.5 Analyze a function and its derivatives to draw its graph. 

We have shown how to use the first and second derivatives of a function to describe the shape of a graph. To graph a 
function  defined on an unbounded domain, we also need to know the behavior of  as ∞  In this section, we 
define limits at infinity and show how these limits affect the graph of a function. At the end of this section, we outline a 
strategy for graphing an arbitrary function 

Limits at Infinity 
We begin by examining what it means for a function to have a finite limit at infinity. Then we study the idea of a function 
with an infinite limit at infinity. Back in Introduction to Functions and Graphs, we looked at vertical asymptotes; in this 
section we deal with horizontal and oblique asymptotes. 

Limits at Infinity and Horizontal Asymptotes 
Recall that  means  becomes arbitrarily close to  as long as  is sufficiently close to  We can extend 
this idea to limits at infinity. For example, consider the function  As can be seen graphically in Figure 4.40 
and numerically in Table 4.2, as the values of  get larger, the values of  approach  We say the limit as 
approaches ∞  of  is  and write  Similarly, for  as the values  get larger, the values of 

∞
approaches  We say the limit as  approaches ∞  of  is  and write 

∞

Figure 4.40 The function approaches the asymptote  as  approaches ∞

Table 4.2 Values of a function  as ∞

Access for free at openstax.org



4.6 • Limits at Infinity and Asymptotes     355

Table 4.2 Values of a function  as ∞

More generally, for any function  we say the limit as ∞  of  is  if  becomes arbitrarily close to  as long 
as  is sufficiently large. In that case, we write  Similarly, we say the limit as ∞  of  is  if 

∞
becomes arbitrarily close to  as long as  and  is sufficiently large. In that case, we write  We 

∞
now look at the definition of a function having a limit at infinity. 

Definition 

(Informal) If the values of  become arbitrarily close to  as  becomes sufficiently large, we say the function 
has a limit at infinity and write 

∞

If the values of  becomes arbitrarily close to  for  as  becomes sufficiently large, we say that the 
function  has a limit at negative infinity and write 

If the values  are getting arbitrarily close to some finite value  as ∞  or ∞  the graph of  approaches 
the line  In that case, the line  is a horizontal asymptote of  (Figure 4.41). For example, for the function 

 since  the line  is a horizontal asymptote of 
∞

Definition 

If  or  we say the line  is a horizontal asymptote of 
∞ ∞

Figure 4.41 (a) As ∞  the values of  are getting arbitrarily close to  The line  is a horizontal asymptote of 
(b) As ∞  the values of  are getting arbitrarily close to  The line  is a horizontal asymptote of 

A function cannot cross a vertical asymptote because the graph must approach infinity (or ∞  from at least one 
direction as  approaches the vertical asymptote. However, a function may cross a horizontal asymptote. In fact, a 



356     4 • Applications of Derivatives

function may cross a horizontal asymptote an unlimited number of times. For example, the function 
shown in Figure 4.42 intersects the horizontal asymptote  an infinite number of times as it oscillates around the 
asymptote with ever-decreasing amplitude. 

Figure 4.42 The graph of  crosses its horizontal asymptote  an infinite number of times. 
The algebraic limit laws and squeeze theorem we introduced in Introduction to Limits also apply to limits at infinity. We 
illustrate how to use these laws to compute several limits at infinity. 

EXAMPLE 4.21 

Computing Limits at Infinity 
For each of the following functions  evaluate  and  Determine the horizontal asymptote(s) for 

∞ ∞

a. 
b. 
c. 

Solution 

a. Using the algebraic limit laws, we have 
∞ ∞ ∞ ∞

Similarly,  Therefore,  has a horizontal asymptote of  and  approaches this 
∞

horizontal asymptote as ∞  as shown in the following graph. 

Figure 4.43 This function approaches a horizontal asymptote as ∞
b. Since  for all  we have 

for all  Also, since 

Access for free at openstax.org



4.6 • Limits at Infinity and Asymptotes     357

∞ ∞

we can apply the squeeze theorem to conclude that 

∞

Similarly, 

∞

Thus,  has a horizontal asymptote of  and  approaches this horizontal asymptote as ∞
as shown in the following graph. 

Figure 4.44 This function crosses its horizontal asymptote multiple times. 

c. To evaluate  and  we first consider the graph of  over the interval 
∞ ∞

 as shown in the following graph. 

Figure 4.45 The graph of  has vertical asymptotes at 

Since 

∞

it follows that 

∞

Similarly, since 



358     4 • Applications of Derivatives

∞

it follows that 

∞

As a result,  and  are horizontal asymptotes of  as shown in the following graph. 

Figure 4.46 This function has two horizontal asymptotes. 

 4.20 Evaluate  and  Determine the horizontal asymptotes of  if any. 
∞ ∞

Infinite Limits at Infinity 
Sometimes the values of a function  become arbitrarily large as ∞  (or as ∞  In this case, we write 

∞  (or ∞  On the other hand, if the values of  are negative but become arbitrarily large in 
∞ ∞

magnitude as ∞  (or as ∞  we write ∞  (or ∞
∞ ∞

For example, consider the function  As seen in Table 4.3 and Figure 4.47, as ∞  the values  become 
arbitrarily large. Therefore, ∞  On the other hand, as ∞  the values of  are negative but 

∞
become arbitrarily large in magnitude. Consequently, ∞

∞

Table 4.3 Values of a power function as ∞

Access for free at openstax.org



4.6 • Limits at Infinity and Asymptotes     359

Figure 4.47 For this function, the functional values approach infinity as ∞

Definition 

(Informal) We say a function  has an infinite limit at infinity and write 

∞
∞

if  becomes arbitrarily large for  sufficiently large. We say a function has a negative infinite limit at infinity and 
write 

∞
∞

if  and  becomes arbitrarily large for  sufficiently large. Similarly, we can define infinite limits as 
∞

Formal Definitions 
Earlier, we used the terms arbitrarily close, arbitrarily large, and sufficiently large to define limits at infinity informally. 
Although these terms provide accurate descriptions of limits at infinity, they are not precise mathematically. Here are 
more formal definitions of limits at infinity. We then look at how to use these definitions to prove results involving limits 
at infinity. 

Definition 

(Formal) We say a function  has a limit at infinity, if there exists a real number  such that for all  there exists 
 such that 

for all  In that case, we write 

∞

(see Figure 4.48). 

We say a function  has a limit at negative infinity if there exists a real number  such that for all  there exists 
 such that 

for all  In that case, we write 

∞



360     4 • Applications of Derivatives

Figure 4.48 For a function with a limit at infinity, for all  
Earlier in this section, we used graphical evidence in Figure 4.40 and numerical evidence in Table 4.2 to conclude that 

 Here we use the formal definition of limit at infinity to prove this result rigorously. 
∞

EXAMPLE 4.22 

A Finite Limit at Infinity Example 
Use the formal definition of limit at infinity to prove that 

∞

Solution 
Let  Let  Therefore, for all  we have 

 4.21 Use the formal definition of limit at infinity to prove that 
∞

We now turn our attention to a more precise definition for an infinite limit at infinity. 

Definition 

(Formal) We say a function  has an infinite limit at infinity and write 

∞
∞

if for all  there exists an  such that 

for all  (see Figure 4.49). 

We say a function has a negative infinite limit at infinity and write 

∞
∞

if for all  there exists an  such that 

for all 

Similarly we can define limits as ∞

Access for free at openstax.org



4.6 • Limits at Infinity and Asymptotes     361

Figure 4.49 For a function with an infinite limit at infinity, for all  

Earlier, we used graphical evidence (Figure 4.47) and numerical evidence (Table 4.3) to conclude that ∞  Here 
∞

we use the formal definition of infinite limit at infinity to prove that result. 

EXAMPLE 4.23 

An Infinite Limit at Infinity 
Use the formal definition of infinite limit at infinity to prove that ∞

∞

Solution 
Let  Let  Then, for all  we have 

Therefore, ∞
∞

 4.22 Use the formal definition of infinite limit at infinity to prove that ∞
∞

End Behavior 
The behavior of a function as ∞  is called the function’s end behavior. At each of the function’s ends, the function 
could exhibit one of the following types of behavior: 
1. The function  approaches a horizontal asymptote 
2. The function ∞  or ∞
3. The function does not approach a finite limit, nor does it approach ∞  or ∞  In this case, the function may have 

some oscillatory behavior. 
Let’s consider several classes of functions here and look at the different types of end behaviors for these functions. 

End Behavior for Polynomial Functions 
Consider the power function  where  is a positive integer. From Figure 4.50 and Figure 4.51, we see that 

∞
∞

and 



362     4 • Applications of Derivatives

∞
∞ ∞

Figure 4.50 For power functions with an even exponent of  ∞
∞ ∞

Figure 4.51 For power functions with an odd exponent of  ∞  and ∞
∞ ∞

Using these facts, it is not difficult to evaluate  and  where  is any constant and  is a positive integer. 
∞ ∞

If  the graph of  is a vertical stretch or compression of  and therefore 

∞ ∞ ∞ ∞

If  the graph of  is a vertical stretch or compression combined with a reflection about the -axis, and 
therefore 

∞ ∞ ∞ ∞

If  in which case 
∞ ∞

Access for free at openstax.org



4.6 • Limits at Infinity and Asymptotes     363

EXAMPLE 4.24 

Limits at Infinity for Power Functions 
For each function  evaluate  and 

∞ ∞

a. 
b. 

Solution 
a. Since the coefficient of  is  the graph of  involves a vertical stretch and reflection of the graph of 

 about the -axis. Therefore, ∞  and ∞
∞ ∞

b. Since the coefficient of  is  the graph of  is a vertical stretch of the graph of  Therefore, 
∞  and ∞

∞ ∞

 4.23 Let  Find 
∞

We now look at how the limits at infinity for power functions can be used to determine  for any polynomial 
∞

function  Consider a polynomial function 

of degree  so that  Factoring, we see that 

As ∞  all the terms inside the parentheses approach zero except the first term. We conclude that 

∞ ∞

For example, the function  behaves like  as ∞  as shown in Figure 4.52 and Table 
4.4. 

Figure 4.52 The end behavior of a polynomial is determined by the behavior of the term with the largest exponent. 



364     4 • Applications of Derivatives

Table 4.4 A polynomial’s end behavior is determined by the term with 
the largest exponent. 

End Behavior for Algebraic Functions 
The end behavior for rational functions and functions involving radicals is a little more complicated than for polynomials. 
In Example 4.25, we show that the limits at infinity of a rational function  depend on the relationship 
between the degree of the numerator and the degree of the denominator. To evaluate the limits at infinity for a rational 
function, we divide the numerator and denominator by the highest power of  appearing in the denominator. This 
determines which term in the overall expression dominates the behavior of the function at large values of 

EXAMPLE 4.25 

Determining End Behavior for Rational Functions 
For each of the following functions, determine the limits as ∞  and ∞  Then, use this information to describe 
the end behavior of the function. 

a.  (Note: The degree of the numerator and the denominator are the same.) 
b.  (Note: The degree of numerator is less than the degree of the denominator.) 

c.  (Note: The degree of numerator is greater than the degree of the denominator.) 

Solution 
a. The highest power of  in the denominator is  Therefore, dividing the numerator and denominator by  and 

applying the algebraic limit laws, we see that 

∞ ∞

∞

∞

∞ ∞

∞ ∞

Since  we know that  is a horizontal asymptote for this function as shown in the following 
∞

graph. 

Access for free at openstax.org



4.6 • Limits at Infinity and Asymptotes     365

Figure 4.53 The graph of this rational function approaches a horizontal asymptote as ∞
b. Since the largest power of  appearing in the denominator is  divide the numerator and denominator by 

After doing so and applying algebraic limit laws, we obtain 

∞ ∞

Therefore  has a horizontal asymptote of  as shown in the following graph. 

Figure 4.54 The graph of this rational function approaches the horizontal asymptote  as ∞
c. Dividing the numerator and denominator by  we have 

∞ ∞

As ∞  the denominator approaches  As ∞  the numerator approaches ∞  As ∞  the numerator 
approaches ∞  Therefore ∞  whereas ∞  as shown in the following figure. 

∞ ∞



366     4 • Applications of Derivatives

Figure 4.55 As ∞  the values ∞  As ∞  the values ∞

 4.24 Evaluate  and use these limits to determine the end behavior of 
∞

Before proceeding, consider the graph of  shown in Figure 4.56. As ∞  and ∞  the graph of 
 appears almost linear. Although  is certainly not a linear function, we now investigate why the graph of  seems to be 

approaching a linear function. First, using long division of polynomials, we can write 

Since  as ∞  we conclude that 

∞ ∞

Therefore, the graph of  approaches the line  as ∞  This line is known as an oblique asymptote for 
(Figure 4.56). 

Access for free at openstax.org



4.6 • Limits at Infinity and Asymptotes     367

Figure 4.56 The graph of the rational function  approaches the oblique asymptote 
∞

We can summarize the results of Example 4.25 to make the following conclusion regarding end behavior for rational 
functions. Consider a rational function 

where 
1. If the degree of the numerator is the same as the degree of the denominator  then  has a horizontal 

asymptote of  as ∞
2. If the degree of the numerator is less than the degree of the denominator  then  has a horizontal 

asymptote of  as ∞
3. If the degree of the numerator is greater than the degree of the denominator  then  does not have a 

horizontal asymptote. The limits at infinity are either positive or negative infinity, depending on the signs of the 
leading terms. In addition, using long division, the function can be rewritten as 

where the degree of  is less than the degree of  As a result,  Therefore, the values of 
∞

 approach zero as ∞  If the degree of  is exactly one more than the degree of 
 the function  is a linear function. In this case, we call  an oblique asymptote. 

Now let’s consider the end behavior for functions involving a radical. 

EXAMPLE 4.26 

Determining End Behavior for a Function Involving a Radical 
Find the limits as ∞  and ∞  for  and describe the end behavior of 

Solution 
Let’s use the same strategy as we did for rational functions: divide the numerator and denominator by a power of  To 
determine the appropriate power of  consider the expression  in the denominator. Since 

for large values of  in effect  appears just to the first power in the denominator. Therefore, we divide the numerator 
and denominator by  Then, using the fact that  for   for  and  for all  we 
calculate the limits as follows: 



368     4 • Applications of Derivatives

∞ ∞

∞

∞

∞ ∞

∞

∞

Therefore,  approaches the horizontal asymptote  as ∞  and the horizontal asymptote  as 
∞  as shown in the following graph. 

Figure 4.57 This function has two horizontal asymptotes and it crosses one of the asymptotes. 

 4.25 Evaluate 
∞

Determining End Behavior for Transcendental Functions 
The six basic trigonometric functions are periodic and do not approach a finite limit as ∞  For example, 
oscillates between  (Figure 4.58). The tangent function  has an infinite number of vertical asymptotes as 

∞  therefore, it does not approach a finite limit nor does it approach ∞  as ∞  as shown in Figure 4.59. 

Figure 4.58 The function  oscillates between  as ∞

Access for free at openstax.org



4.6 • Limits at Infinity and Asymptotes     369

Figure 4.59 The function  does not approach a limit and does not approach ∞  as ∞

Recall that for any base  the function  is an exponential function with domain ∞ ∞  and range 

∞  If  is increasing over ∞ ∞  If   is decreasing over ∞ ∞  For the natural 

exponential function   Therefore,  is increasing on ∞ ∞  and the range is 

∞  The exponential function  approaches ∞  as ∞  and approaches  as ∞  as shown in Table 
4.5 and Figure 4.60. 

Table 4.5 End behavior of the natural exponential 
function 

Figure 4.60 The exponential function approaches zero as ∞  and approaches ∞  as ∞
Recall that the natural logarithm function  is the inverse of the natural exponential function 
Therefore, the domain of  is ∞  and the range is ∞ ∞  The graph of  is the reflection 

of the graph of  about the line  Therefore, ∞  as  and ∞  as ∞  as shown in 
Figure 4.61 and Table 4.6. 

Table 4.6 End behavior of the natural logarithm 
function 



370     4 • Applications of Derivatives

Figure 4.61 The natural logarithm function approaches ∞  as ∞

EXAMPLE 4.27 

Determining End Behavior for a Transcendental Function 
Find the limits as ∞  and ∞  for  and describe the end behavior of 

Solution 
To find the limit as ∞  divide the numerator and denominator by 

∞ ∞

∞

As shown in Figure 4.60, ∞  as ∞  Therefore, 

∞ ∞

We conclude that  and the graph of  approaches the horizontal asymptote  as ∞  To find 
∞

the limit as ∞  use the fact that  as ∞  to conclude that  and therefore the graph of 
∞

approaches the horizontal asymptote  as ∞

 4.26 Find the limits as ∞  and ∞  for 

Guidelines for Drawing the Graph of a Function 
We now have enough analytical tools to draw graphs of a wide variety of algebraic and transcendental functions. Before 
showing how to graph specific functions, let’s look at a general strategy to use when graphing any function. 

Problem-Solving Strategy 

Drawing the Graph of a Function 
Given a function  use the following steps to sketch a graph of 

1. Determine the domain of the function. 
2. Locate the - and -intercepts. 

Access for free at openstax.org



4.6 • Limits at Infinity and Asymptotes     371

3. Evaluate  and  to determine the end behavior. If either of these limits is a finite number 
∞ ∞

then  is a horizontal asymptote. If either of these limits is ∞  or ∞  determine whether  has an oblique 
asymptote. If  is a rational function such that  where the degree of the numerator is greater than 
the degree of the denominator, then  can be written as 

where the degree of  is less than the degree of  The values of  approach the values of  as 
∞  If  is a linear function, it is known as an oblique asymptote. 

4. Determine whether  has any vertical asymptotes. 
5. Calculate  Find all critical points and determine the intervals where  is increasing and where  is decreasing. 

Determine whether  has any local extrema. 
6. Calculate  Determine the intervals where  is concave up and where  is concave down. Use this information 

to determine whether  has any inflection points. The second derivative can also be used as an alternate means 
to determine or verify that  has a local extremum at a critical point. 

Now let’s use this strategy to graph several different functions. We start by graphing a polynomial function. 

EXAMPLE 4.28 

Sketching a Graph of a Polynomial 
Sketch a graph of 

Solution 
Step 1. Since  is a polynomial, the domain is the set of all real numbers. 
Step 2. When  Therefore, the -intercept is  To find the -intercepts, we need to solve the equation 

 gives us the -intercepts  and 

Step 3. We need to evaluate the end behavior of  As ∞  ∞  and ∞  Therefore, 
∞  As ∞  ∞  and ∞  Therefore, ∞  To get even more 

∞ ∞
information about the end behavior of  we can multiply the factors of  When doing so, we see that 

Since the leading term of  is  we conclude that  behaves like  as ∞
Step 4. Since  is a polynomial function, it does not have any vertical asymptotes. 
Step 5. The first derivative of  is 

Therefore,  has two critical points:  Divide the interval ∞ ∞  into the three smaller intervals: ∞
 and ∞  Then, choose test points   and  from these intervals and evaluate the sign of 

 at each of these test points, as shown in the following table. 



372     4 • Applications of Derivatives

Interval Test Point Sign of Derivative Conclusion 

∞  is increasing. 

 is decreasing. 

∞  is increasing. 

From the table, we see that  has a local maximum at  and a local minimum at  Evaluating  at those 
two points, we find that the local maximum value is  and the local minimum value is 
Step 6. The second derivative of  is 

The second derivative is zero at  Therefore, to determine the concavity of  divide the interval ∞ ∞  into the 

smaller intervals ∞  and ∞  and choose test points  and  to determine the concavity of  on 
each of these smaller intervals as shown in the following table. 

Interval Test Point Sign of Conclusion 

∞  is concave down. 

∞  is concave up. 

We note that the information in the preceding table confirms the fact, found in step  that  has a local maximum at 
 and a local minimum at  In addition, the information found in step —namely,  has a local maximum at 
 and a local minimum at  and  at those points—combined with the fact that  changes sign only 

at  confirms the results found in step  on the concavity of 

Combining this information, we arrive at the graph of  shown in the following graph. 

 4.27 Sketch a graph of 

Access for free at openstax.org



4.6 • Limits at Infinity and Asymptotes     373

EXAMPLE 4.29 

Sketching a Rational Function 
Sketch the graph of 

Solution 
Step 1. The function  is defined as long as the denominator is not zero. Therefore, the domain is the set of all real 
numbers  except 

Step 2. Find the intercepts. If  then  so  is an intercept. If  then  which implies 

Therefore,  is the only intercept. 
Step 3. Evaluate the limits at infinity. Since  is a rational function, divide the numerator and denominator by the highest 
power in the denominator:  We obtain 

∞ ∞

Therefore,  has a horizontal asymptote of  as ∞  and ∞
Step 4. To determine whether  has any vertical asymptotes, first check to see whether the denominator has any zeroes. 
We find the denominator is zero when  To determine whether the lines  or  are vertical asymptotes 
of  evaluate  and  By looking at each one-sided limit as  we see that 

∞ ∞

In addition, by looking at each one-sided limit as  we find that 

∞ ∞

Step 5. Calculate the first derivative: 

Critical points occur at points  where  or  is undefined. We see that  when  The 
derivative  is not undefined at any point in the domain of  However,  are not in the domain of  Therefore, to 
determine where  is increasing and where  is decreasing, divide the interval ∞ ∞  into four smaller intervals: 

∞    and ∞  and choose a test point in each interval to determine the sign of  in each 
of these intervals. The values    and  are good choices for test points as shown in the 
following table. 

Interval Test Point Sign of Conclusion 

∞  is decreasing. 

 is decreasing. 



374     4 • Applications of Derivatives

Interval Test Point Sign of Conclusion 

 is increasing. 

∞  is increasing. 

From this analysis, we conclude that  has a local minimum at  but no local maximum. 
Step 6. Calculate the second derivative: 

To determine the intervals where  is concave up and where  is concave down, we first need to find all points  where 
 or  is undefined. Since the numerator  for any   is never zero. Furthermore,  is 

not undefined for any  in the domain of  However, as discussed earlier,  are not in the domain of  Therefore, 
to determine the concavity of  we divide the interval ∞ ∞  into the three smaller intervals ∞  

and ∞  and choose a test point in each of these intervals to evaluate the sign of  in each of these intervals. 
The values   and  are possible test points as shown in the following table. 

Interval Test Point Sign of Conclusion 

∞  is concave down. 

 is concave up. 

∞  is concave down. 

Combining all this information, we arrive at the graph of  shown below. Note that, although  changes concavity at 
 and  there are no inflection points at either of these places because  is not continuous at  or 

Access for free at openstax.org



4.6 • Limits at Infinity and Asymptotes     375

 4.28 Sketch a graph of 

EXAMPLE 4.30 

Sketching a Rational Function with an Oblique Asymptote 
Sketch the graph of 

Solution 
Step 1. The domain of  is the set of all real numbers  except 
Step 2. Find the intercepts. We can see that when   so  is the only intercept. 
Step 3. Evaluate the limits at infinity. Since the degree of the numerator is one more than the degree of the denominator, 

 must have an oblique asymptote. To find the oblique asymptote, use long division of polynomials to write 

Since  as ∞   approaches the line  as ∞  The line  is an oblique 
asymptote for 
Step 4. To check for vertical asymptotes, look at where the denominator is zero. Here the denominator is zero at 
Looking at both one-sided limits as  we find 

∞ ∞

Therefore,  is a vertical asymptote, and we have determined the behavior of  as  approaches  from the right 
and the left. 
Step 5. Calculate the first derivative: 

We have  when  Therefore,  and  are critical points. Since  is undefined at 
 we need to divide the interval ∞ ∞  into the smaller intervals ∞    and ∞  and 

choose a test point from each interval to evaluate the sign of  in each of these smaller intervals. For example, let 
   and  be the test points as shown in the following table. 



376     4 • Applications of Derivatives

Interval Test Point Sign of Conclusion 

∞  is increasing. 

 is decreasing. 

 is decreasing. 

∞  is increasing. 

From this table, we see that  has a local maximum at  and a local minimum at  The value of  at the local 
maximum is  and the value of  at the local minimum is  Therefore,  and  are important 
points on the graph. 
Step 6. Calculate the second derivative: 

We see that  is never zero or undefined for  in the domain of  Since  is undefined at  to check concavity 
we just divide the interval ∞ ∞  into the two smaller intervals ∞  and ∞  and choose a test point from 
each interval to evaluate the sign of  in each of these intervals. The values  and  are possible test points 
as shown in the following table. 

Interval Test Point Sign of Conclusion 

∞  is concave down. 

∞  is concave up. 

From the information gathered, we arrive at the following graph for 

Access for free at openstax.org



4.6 • Limits at Infinity and Asymptotes     377

 4.29 Find the oblique asymptote for 

EXAMPLE 4.31 

Sketching the Graph of a Function with a Cusp 
Sketch a graph of 

Solution 
Step 1. Since the cube-root function is defined for all real numbers  and  the domain of  is all 
real numbers. 
Step 2: To find the -intercept, evaluate  Since  the -intercept is  To find the -intercept, solve 

 The solution of this equation is  so the -intercept is 

Step 3: Since ∞  the function continues to grow without bound as ∞  and ∞
∞

Step 4: The function has no vertical asymptotes. 
Step 5: To determine where  is increasing or decreasing, calculate  We find 

This function is not zero anywhere, but it is undefined when  Therefore, the only critical point is  Divide the 
interval ∞ ∞  into the smaller intervals ∞  and ∞  and choose test points in each of these intervals to 
determine the sign of  in each of these smaller intervals. Let  and  be the test points as shown in the 
following table. 

Interval Test Point Sign of Conclusion 

∞  is decreasing. 

∞  is increasing. 

We conclude that  has a local minimum at  Evaluating  at  we find that the value of  at the local 



378     4 • Applications of Derivatives

minimum is zero. Note that  is undefined, so to determine the behavior of the function at this critical point, we 
need to examine  Looking at the one-sided limits, we have 

∞ ∞

Therefore,  has a cusp at 
Step 6: To determine concavity, we calculate the second derivative of 

We find that  is defined for all  but is undefined when  Therefore, divide the interval ∞ ∞  into the 

smaller intervals ∞  and ∞  and choose test points to evaluate the sign of  in each of these intervals. 
As we did earlier, let  and  be test points as shown in the following table. 

Interval Test Point Sign of Conclusion 

∞  is concave down. 

∞  is concave down. 

From this table, we conclude that  is concave down everywhere. Combining all of this information, we arrive at the 
following graph for 

 4.30 Consider the function  Determine the point on the graph where a cusp is located. 
Determine the end behavior of 

Access for free at openstax.org



4.6 • Limits at Infinity and Asymptotes     379

 SECTION 4.6 EXERCISES 
For the following exercises, examine the graphs. Identify where the vertical asymptotes are located. 
251.  252 . 

253.  254 . 

255. 

For the following functions  determine whether there is an asymptote at  Justify your answer without 
graphing on a calculator. 

256.  257 .  258 . 

259.  260 . 



380     4 • Applications of Derivatives

For the following exercises, evaluate the limit. 

261.  262 .  263 . 
∞ ∞ ∞

264.  265 .  266 . 
∞ ∞ ∞

267.  268 .  269 . 
∞ ∞ ∞

270. 
∞

For the following exercises, find the horizontal and vertical asymptotes. 

271.  272 .  273 . 

274.  275 .  276 . 

277.  278 .  279 . 

280.  281 .  282 . 

283.  284 . 

For the following exercises, construct a function  that has the given asymptotes. 
285.  and  286 .  and  287 .  
288. 

For the following exercises, graph the function on a graphing calculator on the window  and estimate the 
horizontal asymptote or limit. Then, calculate the actual horizontal asymptote or limit. 

289. [T]  290 . [T]  291 . [T] 
∞

292. [T]  293 . [T] 
∞ ∞

For the following exercises, draw a graph of the functions without using a calculator. Be sure to notice all important 
features of the graph: local maxima and minima, inflection points, and asymptotic behavior. 

294.  295 .  296 . 

297.  298 .  299 . 

300.  301 .  on  302 . 

303.  304 .  305 . 

306. For  to have  307 . For  to have  308 . If  has asymptotes 
an asymptote at an asymptote at at  and  then 
then the polynomials then the polynomials  has what 

 and  must  and  must asymptotes? 
have what relation? have what relation? 

Access for free at openstax.org



4.7 • Applied Optimization Problems     381

309. Both  and  310 . True or false: Every ratio 
 have of polynomials has 

vertical asymptotes. 
asymptotes at  and 

 What is the most 
obvious difference 
between these two 
functions? 

4.7 Applied Optimization Problems 
Learning Objectives 

4.7.1 Set up and solve optimization problems in several applied fields. 
One common application of calculus is calculating the minimum or maximum value of a function. For example, 
companies often want to minimize production costs or maximize revenue. In manufacturing, it is often desirable to 
minimize the amount of material used to package a product with a certain volume. In this section, we show how to set 
up these types of minimization and maximization problems and solve them by using the tools developed in this chapter. 

Solving Optimization Problems over a Closed, Bounded Interval 
The basic idea of the optimization problems that follow is the same. We have a particular quantity that we are 
interested in maximizing or minimizing. However, we also have some auxiliary condition that needs to be satisfied. For 
example, in Example 4.32, we are interested in maximizing the area of a rectangular garden. Certainly, if we keep making 
the side lengths of the garden larger, the area will continue to become larger. However, what if we have some restriction 
on how much fencing we can use for the perimeter? In this case, we cannot make the garden as large as we like. Let’s 
look at how we can maximize the area of a rectangle subject to some constraint on the perimeter. 

EXAMPLE 4.32 

Maximizing the Area of a Garden 
A rectangular garden is to be constructed using a rock wall as one side of the garden and wire fencing for the other 
three sides (Figure 4.62). Given  ft of wire fencing, determine the dimensions that would create a garden of maximum 
area. What is the maximum area? 

Figure 4.62 We want to determine the measurements  and  that will create a garden with a maximum area using 
ft of fencing. 

Solution 
Let  denote the length of the side of the garden perpendicular to the rock wall and  denote the length of the side 
parallel to the rock wall. Then the area of the garden is 

We want to find the maximum possible area subject to the constraint that the total fencing is  From Figure 4.62, 
the total amount of fencing used will be  Therefore, the constraint equation is 



382     4 • Applications of Derivatives

Solving this equation for  we have  Thus, we can write the area as 

Before trying to maximize the area function  we need to determine the domain under consideration. 
To construct a rectangular garden, we certainly need the lengths of both sides to be positive. Therefore, we need 
and  Since  if  then  Therefore, we are trying to determine the maximum value of 
for  over the open interval  We do not know that a function necessarily has a maximum value over an open 
interval. However, we do know that a continuous function has an absolute maximum (and absolute minimum) over a 
closed interval. Therefore, let’s consider the function  over the closed interval  If the 
maximum value occurs at an interior point, then we have found the value  in the open interval  that maximizes 
the area of the garden. Therefore, we consider the following problem: 

Maximize  over the interval 
As mentioned earlier, since  is a continuous function on a closed, bounded interval, by the extreme value theorem, it 
has a maximum and a minimum. These extreme values occur either at endpoints or critical points. At the endpoints, 

 Since the area is positive for all  in the open interval  the maximum must occur at a critical point. 
Differentiating the function  we obtain 

Therefore, the only critical point is  (Figure 4.63). We conclude that the maximum area must occur when 
Then we have  To maximize the area of the garden, let  ft and  The 
area of this garden is 

Figure 4.63 To maximize the area of the garden, we need to find the maximum value of the function 

 4.31 Determine the maximum area if we want to make the same rectangular garden as in Figure 4.63, but we 
have  ft of fencing. 

Now let’s look at a general strategy for solving optimization problems similar to Example 4.32. 

Problem-Solving Strategy 

Solving Optimization Problems 
1. Introduce all variables. If applicable, draw a figure and label all variables. 
2. Determine which quantity is to be maximized or minimized, and for what range of values of the other variables 

(if this can be determined at this time). 
3. Write a formula for the quantity to be maximized or minimized in terms of the variables. This formula may 

involve more than one variable. 

Access for free at openstax.org



4.7 • Applied Optimization Problems     383

4. Write any equations relating the independent variables in the formula from step  Use these equations to write 
the quantity to be maximized or minimized as a function of one variable. 

5. Identify the domain of consideration for the function in step  based on the physical problem to be solved. 
6. Locate the maximum or minimum value of the function from step  This step typically involves looking for 

critical points and evaluating a function at endpoints. 

Now let’s apply this strategy to maximize the volume of an open-top box given a constraint on the amount of material to 
be used. 

EXAMPLE 4.33 

Maximizing the Volume of a Box 
An open-top box is to be made from a  in. by  in. piece of cardboard by removing a square from each corner of the 
box and folding up the flaps on each side. What size square should be cut out of each corner to get a box with the 
maximum volume? 

Solution 
Step 1: Let  be the side length of the square to be removed from each corner (Figure 4.64). Then, the remaining four 
flaps can be folded up to form an open-top box. Let  be the volume of the resulting box. 

Figure 4.64 A square with side length  inches is removed from each corner of the piece of cardboard. The remaining 
flaps are folded to form an open-top box. 
Step 2: We are trying to maximize the volume of a box. Therefore, the problem is to maximize 
Step 3: As mentioned in step  we are trying to maximize the volume of a box. The volume of a box is 
where  are the length, width, and height, respectively. 
Step 4: From Figure 4.64, we see that the height of the box is  inches, the length is  inches, and the width is 

 inches. Therefore, the volume of the box is 

Step 5: To determine the domain of consideration, let’s examine Figure 4.64. Certainly, we need  Furthermore, the 
side length of the square cannot be greater than or equal to half the length of the shorter side,  in.; otherwise, one of 
the flaps would be completely cut off. Therefore, we are trying to determine whether there is a maximum volume of the 
box for  over the open interval  Since  is a continuous function over the closed interval  we know  will 
have an absolute maximum over the closed interval. Therefore, we consider  over the closed interval  and check 
whether the absolute maximum occurs at an interior point. 
Step 6: Since  is a continuous function over the closed, bounded interval   must have an absolute 
maximum (and an absolute minimum). Since  at the endpoints and  for  the maximum 
must occur at a critical point. The derivative is 



384     4 • Applications of Derivatives

To find the critical points, we need to solve the equation 

Dividing both sides of this equation by  the problem simplifies to solving the equation 

Using the quadratic formula, we find that the critical points are 

Since  is not in the domain of consideration, the only critical point we need to consider is  Therefore, 
the volume is maximized if we let  The maximum volume is 

 as shown in the following graph. 

Figure 4.65 Maximizing the volume of the box leads to finding the maximum value of a cubic polynomial. 

 MEDIA 

Watch a video (http://www.openstax.org/l/20_boxvolume) about optimizing the volume of a box. 

 4.32 Suppose the dimensions of the cardboard in Example 4.33 are 20 in. by 30 in. Let  be the side length of 
each square and write the volume of the open-top box as a function of  Determine the domain of 
consideration for 

EXAMPLE 4.34 

Minimizing Travel Time 
An island is  due north of its closest point along a straight shoreline. A visitor is staying at a cabin on the shore that is 

 west of that point. The visitor is planning to go from the cabin to the island. Suppose the visitor runs at a rate of 
 and swims at a rate of  How far should the visitor run before swimming to minimize the time it takes to 

reach the island? 

Solution 
Step 1: Let  be the distance running and let  be the distance swimming (Figure 4.66). Let  be the time it takes to get 
from the cabin to the island. 

Access for free at openstax.org



4.7 • Applied Optimization Problems     385

Figure 4.66 How can we choose  and  to minimize the travel time from the cabin to the island? 
Step 2: The problem is to minimize 
Step 3: To find the time spent traveling from the cabin to the island, add the time spent running and the time spent 
swimming. Since Distance  Rate  Time  the time spent running is 

and the time spent swimming is 

Therefore, the total time spent traveling is 

Step 4: From Figure 4.66, the line segment of  miles forms the hypotenuse of a right triangle with legs of length 
and  Therefore, by the Pythagorean theorem,  and we obtain  Thus, the 
total time spent traveling is given by the function 

Step 5: From Figure 4.66, we see that  Therefore,  is the domain of consideration. 
Step 6: Since  is a continuous function over a closed, bounded interval, it has a maximum and a minimum. Let’s 
begin by looking for any critical points of  over the interval  The derivative is 

If  then 

Therefore, 

(4.6) 

Squaring both sides of this equation, we see that if  satisfies this equation, then  must satisfy 

which implies 



386     4 • Applications of Derivatives

We conclude that if  is a critical point, then  satisfies 

Therefore, the possibilities for critical points are 

Since  is not in the domain, it is not a possibility for a critical point. On the other hand,  is 
in the domain. Since we squared both sides of Equation 4.6 to arrive at the possible critical points, it remains to verify 
that  satisfies Equation 4.6. Since  does satisfy that equation, we conclude that 

 is a critical point, and it is the only one. To justify that the time is minimized for this value of  we just 
need to check the values of  at the endpoints  and  and compare them with the value of  at the 
critical point  We find that  and  whereas 
Therefore, we conclude that  has a local minimum at  mi. 

 4.33 Suppose the island is  mi from shore, and the distance from the cabin to the point on the shore closest to 
the island is  Suppose a visitor swims at the rate of  and runs at a rate of  Let 
denote the distance the visitor will run before swimming, and find a function for the time it takes the 
visitor to get from the cabin to the island. 

In business, companies are interested in maximizing revenue. In the following example, we consider a scenario in which 
a company has collected data on how many cars it is able to lease, depending on the price it charges its customers to 
rent a car. Let’s use these data to determine the price the company should charge to maximize the amount of money it 
brings in. 

EXAMPLE 4.35 

Maximizing Revenue 
Owners of a car rental company have determined that if they charge customers  dollars per day to rent a car, where 

 the number of cars  they rent per day can be modeled by the linear function  If they 
charge  per day or less, they will rent all their cars. If they charge  per day or more, they will not rent any cars. 
Assuming the owners plan to charge customers between $50 per day and  per day to rent a car, how much should 
they charge to maximize their revenue? 

Solution 
Step 1: Let  be the price charged per car per day and let  be the number of cars rented per day. Let  be the revenue 
per day. 
Step 2: The problem is to maximize 
Step 3: The revenue (per day) is equal to the number of cars rented per day times the price charged per car per 
day—that is, 
Step 4: Since the number of cars rented per day is modeled by the linear function  the revenue  can 
be represented by the function 

Step 5: Since the owners plan to charge between  per car per day and  per car per day, the problem is to find the 
maximum revenue  for  in the closed interval 
Step 6: Since  is a continuous function over the closed, bounded interval  it has an absolute maximum (and 
an absolute minimum) in that interval. To find the maximum value, look for critical points. The derivative is 

 Therefore, the critical point is  When   When 

Access for free at openstax.org



4.7 • Applied Optimization Problems     387

 When   Therefore, the absolute maximum occurs at  The car rental 
company should charge  per day per car to maximize revenue as shown in the following figure. 

Figure 4.67 To maximize revenue, a car rental company has to balance the price of a rental against the number of cars 
people will rent at that price. 

 4.34 A car rental company charges its customers  dollars per day, where  It has found that the 
number of cars rented per day can be modeled by the linear function  How much should 
the company charge each customer to maximize revenue? 

EXAMPLE 4.36 

Maximizing the Area of an Inscribed Rectangle 
A rectangle is to be inscribed in the ellipse 

What should the dimensions of the rectangle be to maximize its area? What is the maximum area? 

Solution 
Step 1: For a rectangle to be inscribed in the ellipse, the sides of the rectangle must be parallel to the axes. Let  be the 
length of the rectangle and  be its width. Let  be the area of the rectangle. 

Figure 4.68 We want to maximize the area of a rectangle inscribed in an ellipse. 
Step 2: The problem is to maximize 
Step 3: The area of the rectangle is 
Step 4: Let  be the corner of the rectangle that lies in the first quadrant, as shown in Figure 4.68. We can write 



388     4 • Applications of Derivatives

length  and width  Since  and  we have  Therefore, the area is 

Step 5: From Figure 4.68, we see that to inscribe a rectangle in the ellipse, the -coordinate of the corner in the first 
quadrant must satisfy  Therefore, the problem reduces to looking for the maximum value of  over the 
open interval  Since  will have an absolute maximum (and absolute minimum) over the closed interval 
we consider  over the interval  If the absolute maximum occurs at an interior point, then we 
have found an absolute maximum in the open interval. 
Step 6: As mentioned earlier,  is a continuous function over the closed, bounded interval  Therefore, it has an 
absolute maximum (and absolute minimum). At the endpoints  and   For  
Therefore, the maximum must occur at a critical point. Taking the derivative of  we obtain 

To find critical points, we need to find where  We can see that if  is a solution of 

(4.7) 

then  must satisfy 

Therefore,  Thus,  are the possible solutions of Equation 4.7. Since we are considering  over the 
interval   is a possibility for a critical point, but  is not. Therefore, we check whether  is a 
solution of Equation 4.7. Since  is a solution of Equation 4.7, we conclude that  is the only critical point of 

 in the interval  Therefore,  must have an absolute maximum at the critical point  To determine 
the dimensions of the rectangle, we need to find the length  and the width  If  then 

Therefore, the dimensions of the rectangle are  and  The area of this rectangle is 

 4.35 Modify the area function  if the rectangle is to be inscribed in the unit circle  What is the 
domain of consideration? 

Solving Optimization Problems when the Interval Is Not Closed or Is Unbounded 
In the previous examples, we considered functions on closed, bounded domains. Consequently, by the extreme value 
theorem, we were guaranteed that the functions had absolute extrema. Let’s now consider functions for which the 
domain is neither closed nor bounded. 
Many functions still have at least one absolute extrema, even if the domain is not closed or the domain is unbounded. 
For example, the function  over ∞ ∞  has an absolute minimum of  at  Therefore, we can still 
consider functions over unbounded domains or open intervals and determine whether they have any absolute extrema. 
In the next example, we try to minimize a function over an unbounded domain. We will see that, although the domain of 

Access for free at openstax.org



4.7 • Applied Optimization Problems     389

consideration is ∞  the function has an absolute minimum. 

In the following example, we look at constructing a box of least surface area with a prescribed volume. It is not difficult 
to show that for a closed-top box, by symmetry, among all boxes with a specified volume, a cube will have the smallest 
surface area. Consequently, we consider the modified problem of determining which open-topped box with a specified 
volume has the smallest surface area. 

EXAMPLE 4.37 

Minimizing Surface Area 
A rectangular box with a square base, an open top, and a volume of  in.3 is to be constructed. What should the 
dimensions of the box be to minimize the surface area of the box? What is the minimum surface area? 

Solution 
Step 1: Draw a rectangular box and introduce the variable  to represent the length of each side of the square base; let 
represent the height of the box. Let  denote the surface area of the open-top box. 

Figure 4.69 We want to minimize the surface area of a square-based box with a given volume. 
Step 2: We need to minimize the surface area. Therefore, we need to minimize 
Step 3: Since the box has an open top, we need only determine the area of the four vertical sides and the base. The area 
of each of the four vertical sides is  The area of the base is  Therefore, the surface area of the box is 

Step 4: Since the volume of this box is  and the volume is given as  the constraint equation is 

Solving the constraint equation for  we have  Therefore, we can write the surface area as a function of  only: 

Therefore, 

Step 5: Since we are requiring that  we cannot have  Therefore, we need  On the other hand,  is 
allowed to have any positive value. Note that as  becomes large, the height of the box  becomes correspondingly small 
so that  Similarly, as  becomes small, the height of the box becomes correspondingly large. We conclude 
that the domain is the open, unbounded interval ∞  Note that, unlike the previous examples, we cannot reduce our 
problem to looking for an absolute maximum or absolute minimum over a closed, bounded interval. However, in the 
next step, we discover why this function must have an absolute minimum over the interval ∞

Step 6: Note that as  ∞  Also, as ∞  ∞  Since  is a continuous function that approaches 
infinity at the ends, it must have an absolute minimum at some ∞  This minimum must occur at a critical point 
of  The derivative is 

Therefore,  when  Solving this equation for  we obtain  so  Since this 



390     4 • Applications of Derivatives

is the only critical point of  the absolute minimum must occur at  (see Figure 4.70). When 
 Therefore, the dimensions of the box should be  and  With these 

dimensions, the surface area is 

Figure 4.70 We can use a graph to determine the dimensions of a box of given the volume and the minimum surface 
area. 

 4.36 Consider the same open-top box, which is to have volume  Suppose the cost of the material for 
the base is  and the cost of the material for the sides is  and we are trying to minimize the 
cost of this box. Write the cost as a function of the side lengths of the base. (Let  be the side length of the 
base and  be the height of the box.) 

 SECTION 4.7 EXERCISES 
For the following exercises, answer by proof, counterexample, or explanation. 
311. When you find the  312 . Why do you need to check  313 . True or False. For every 

maximum for an the endpoints for continuous nonlinear 
optimization problem, optimization problems? function, you can find the 
why do you need to check value  that maximizes 
the sign of the derivative the function. 
around the critical points? 

314. True or False. For every 
continuous nonconstant 
function on a closed, 
finite domain, there exists 
at least one  that 
minimizes or maximizes 
the function. 

Access for free at openstax.org



4.7 • Applied Optimization Problems     391

For the following exercises, set up and evaluate each optimization problem. 
315. To carry a suitcase on an  316 . You are constructing a cardboard b o3x17 . Find the positive integer 

airplane, the length with the dimensions  You that minimizes the sum of 
 height of the then cut equal-size squares from the number and its 

box must be less than or each corner so you may fold the reciprocal. 
equal to  Assuming edges. What are the dimensions of 
the base of the suitcase is the box with the largest volume? 
square, show that the 
volume is 

What height allows you to 
have the largest volume? 

318. Find the two positive 
integers so that their sum 
is  and the sum of their 
squares is as large as 
possible. Then find 
another two positive 
integers so that their sum 
is 10 and the sum of their 
squares is as small as 
possible. 

For the following exercises, consider the construction of a pen to enclose an area. 
319. You have  of fencing  320 . You have  of fencing  321 . You need to construct a 

to construct a rectangular to make a pen for hogs. If fence around an area of 
pen for cattle. What are you have a river on one  What are the 
the dimensions of the pen side of your property, dimensions of the 
that maximize the area? what is the dimension of rectangular pen to 

the rectangular pen that minimize the amount of 
maximizes the area? material needed? 

322. Two poles are connected by a wire  323 . [T] You are moving into a new 
that is also connected to the ground. apartment and notice there is a 
The first pole is  tall and the corner where the hallway narrows 
second pole is  tall. There is a from  What is the 
distance of  between the two length of the longest item that can 
poles. Where should the wire be be carried horizontally around the 
anchored to the ground to minimize corner? 
the amount of wire needed? 



392     4 • Applications of Derivatives

324. A patient’s pulse measures  325 . In the previous problem, assume the 
 To patient was nervous during the third 

determine an accurate measurement, so we only weight that 
measurement of pulse, the doctor value half as much as the others. 
wants to know what value What is the value that minimizes 
minimizes the expression 

What value minimizes it? 
326. You can run at a speed of  mph and 

swim at a speed of  mph and are 
located on the shore,  miles east of 
an island that is  mile north of the 
shoreline. How far should you run 
west to minimize the time needed to 
reach the island? 

For the following problems, consider a lifeguard at a circular pool with diameter  He must reach someone who is 
drowning on the exact opposite side of the pool, at position  The lifeguard swims with a speed  and runs around the 
pool at speed 

 327 . Find a function that  328 . Find at what angle  the 
measures the total lifeguard should swim to 
amount of time it takes to reach the drowning 
reach the drowning person in the least 
person as a function of amount of time. 
the swim angle, 

329. A truck uses gas as 
 where 

represents the speed of 
the truck and 
represents the gallons of 
fuel per mile. Assuming 
and  are positive, at what 
speed is fuel consumption 
minimized? 

For the following exercises, consider a limousine that gets  at speed  the chauffeur costs 
and gas is 
330. Find the cost per mile at  331 . Find the cheapest driving 

speed speed. 

Access for free at openstax.org



4.7 • Applied Optimization Problems     393

For the following exercises, consider a pizzeria that sell pizzas for a revenue of  and costs 
 where  represents the number of pizzas . 

332. Find the profit function  333 . Assume that  334 . Assume that 
for the number of pizzas. and  How and 
How many pizzas gives many pizzas sold 
the largest profit per maximizes the profit? How many pizzas sold 
pizza? maximizes the profit? 

For the following exercises, consider a wire  long cut into two pieces. One piece forms a circle with radius  and the 
other forms a square of side 
335. Choose  to maximize the  336 . Choose  to minimize the 

sum of their areas. sum of their areas. 

For the following exercises, consider two nonnegative numbers  and  such that  Maximize and minimize 
the quantities. 

337.  338 .  339 . 

340. 

For the following exercises, draw the given optimization problem and solve. 
341. Find the volume of the  342 . Find the volume of the  343 . Find the area of the 

largest right circular largest right cone that fits largest rectangle that fits 
cylinder that fits in a in a sphere of radius into the triangle with 
sphere of radius sides  and 

344. Find the largest volume of  345 . Find the dimensions of  346 . Find the dimensions of a 
a cylinder that fits into a the closed cylinder right cone with surface 
cone that has base radius volume  that has area  that has the 

 and height the least amount of largest volume. 
surface area. 

For the following exercises, consider the points on the given graphs. Use a calculator to graph the functions. 
347. [T] Where is the line  348 . [T] Where is the line  349 . [T] Where is the parabola 

 closest to the  closest to  closest to point 
origin? point 

350. [T] Where is the parabola 
 closest to point 



394     4 • Applications of Derivatives

For the following exercises, write an equation that models each related-rates situation. Do not solve. 
351. A window is composed of a  352 . You have a garden row of  353 . You are constructing a 

semicircle placed on top of a  watermelon plants box for your cat to sleep 
rectangle. If you have  of that produce an average in. The plush material for 
window-framing materials for of  watermelons the square bottom of the 
the outer frame, what is the apiece. For any additional box costs  and the 
maximum size of the window watermelon plants material for the sides 
you can create? Use  to planted, the output per costs  You need a 
represent the radius of the watermelon plant drops box with volume 
semicircle. by one watermelon. How Find the dimensions of 

many extra watermelon the box that minimize 
plants should you plant? cost. Use  to represent 

the length of the side of 
the box. 

354. You are building five identical pens  355 . You are the manager of 
adjacent to each other with a total an apartment complex 
area of  as shown in the with  units. When you 
following figure. What dimensions set rent at  all 
should you use to minimize the apartments are rented. As 
amount of fencing? you increase rent by 

 one fewer 
apartment is rented. 
Maintenance costs run 

 for each 
occupied unit. What is the 
rent that maximizes the 
total amount of profit? 

4.8 L’Hôpital’s Rule 
Learning Objectives 

4.8.1 Recognize when to apply L’Hôpital’s rule. 
4.8.2 Identify indeterminate forms produced by quotients, products, subtractions, and powers, and apply 

L’Hôpital’s rule in each case. 
4.8.3 Describe the relative growth rates of functions. 

In this section, we examine a powerful tool for evaluating limits. This tool, known as L’Hôpital’s rule, uses derivatives to 
calculate limits. With this rule, we will be able to evaluate many limits we have not yet been able to determine. Instead of 
relying on numerical evidence to conjecture that a limit exists, we will be able to show definitively that a limit exists and 
to determine its exact value. 

Access for free at openstax.org



4.8 • L’Hôpital’s Rule     395

Applying L’Hôpital’s Rule 
L’Hôpital’s rule can be used to evaluate limits involving the quotient of two functions. Consider 

If  then 

However, what happens if  and  We call this one of the indeterminate forms, of type  This 

is considered an indeterminate form because we cannot determine the exact behavior of  as  without further 
analysis. We have seen examples of this earlier in the text. For example, consider 

For the first of these examples, we can evaluate the limit by factoring the numerator and writing 

For  we were able to show, using a geometric argument, that 

Here we use a different technique for evaluating limits such as these. Not only does this technique provide an easier way 
to evaluate these limits, but also, and more important, it provides us with a way to evaluate many other limits that we 
could not calculate previously. 
The idea behind L’Hôpital’s rule can be explained using local linear approximations. Consider two differentiable functions 

 and  such that  and such that  For  near  we can write 

and 

Therefore, 

Figure 4.71 If  then the ratio  is approximately equal to the ratio of their linear 



396     4 • Applications of Derivatives

approximations near 
Since  is differentiable at  then  is continuous at  and therefore  Similarly, 

 If we also assume that  and  are continuous at  then  and 
 Using these ideas, we conclude that 

Note that the assumption that  and  are continuous at  and  can be loosened. We state L’Hôpital’s rule 
formally for the indeterminate form  Also note that the notation  does not mean we are actually dividing zero by 
zero. Rather, we are using the notation  to represent a quotient of limits, each of which is zero. 

Theorem 4.12 

L’Hôpital’s Rule (0/0 Case) 
Suppose  and  are differentiable functions over an open interval containing  except possibly at  If 
and  then 

assuming the limit on the right exists or is ∞  or ∞  This result also holds if we are considering one-sided limits, or if 
∞ ∞

Proof 
We provide a proof of this theorem in the special case when  and  are all continuous over an open interval 
containing  In that case, since  and  and  are continuous at  it follows that 

 Therefore, 

Note that L’Hôpital’s rule states we can calculate the limit of a quotient  by considering the limit of the quotient of the 

derivatives  It is important to realize that we are not calculating the derivative of the quotient 

□ 

EXAMPLE 4.38 

Applying L’Hôpital’s Rule (0/0 Case) 
Evaluate each of the following limits by applying L’Hôpital’s rule. 

Access for free at openstax.org



4.8 • L’Hôpital’s Rule     397

a. 

b. 

c. 
∞

d. 

Solution 
a. Since the numerator  and the denominator  we can apply L’Hôpital’s rule to evaluate this limit. 

We have 

b. As  the numerator  and the denominator  Therefore, we can apply L’Hôpital’s rule. We 
obtain 

c. As ∞  the numerator  and the denominator  Therefore, we can apply L’Hôpital’s rule. We 
obtain 

∞ ∞ ∞

d. As  both the numerator and denominator approach zero. Therefore, we can apply L’Hôpital’s rule. We obtain 

Since the numerator and denominator of this new quotient both approach zero as  we apply L’Hôpital’s rule 
again. In doing so, we see that 

Therefore, we conclude that 

 4.37 Evaluate 

We can also use L’Hôpital’s rule to evaluate limits of quotients  in which ∞  and ∞  Limits of this 
form are classified as indeterminate forms of type ∞ ∞  Again, note that we are not actually dividing ∞  by ∞  Since ∞  is 
not a real number, that is impossible; rather, ∞ ∞  is used to represent a quotient of limits, each of which is ∞  or ∞



398     4 • Applications of Derivatives

Theorem 4.13 

L’Hôpital’s Rule ∞ ∞  Case) 
Suppose  and  are differentiable functions over an open interval containing  except possibly at  Suppose 

∞  (or ∞  and ∞  (or ∞  Then, 

assuming the limit on the right exists or is ∞  or ∞  This result also holds if the limit is infinite, if ∞  or ∞  or the 
limit is one-sided. 

EXAMPLE 4.39 

Applying L’Hôpital’s Rule ∞ ∞  Case) 
Evaluate each of the following limits by applying L’Hôpital’s rule. 

a. 
∞

b. 

Solution 
a. Since  and  are first-degree polynomials with positive leading coefficients, ∞  and 

∞
∞  Therefore, we apply L’Hôpital’s rule and obtain 

∞

∞ ∞

Note that this limit can also be calculated without invoking L’Hôpital’s rule. Earlier in the chapter we showed how to 
evaluate such a limit by dividing the numerator and denominator by the highest power of  in the denominator. In 
doing so, we saw that 

∞ ∞

L’Hôpital’s rule provides us with an alternative means of evaluating this type of limit. 
b. Here, ∞  and ∞  Therefore, we can apply L’Hôpital’s rule and obtain 

Now as  ∞  Therefore, the first term in the denominator is approaching zero and the second term 
is getting really large. In such a case, anything can happen with the product. Therefore, we cannot make any 
conclusion yet. To evaluate the limit, we use the definition of  to write 

Now  and  so we apply L’Hôpital’s rule again. We find 

Access for free at openstax.org



4.8 • L’Hôpital’s Rule     399

We conclude that 

 4.38 Evaluate 
∞

As mentioned, L’Hôpital’s rule is an extremely useful tool for evaluating limits. It is important to remember, however, that 
to apply L’Hôpital’s rule to a quotient  it is essential that the limit of  be of the form  or ∞ ∞  Consider the 
following example. 

EXAMPLE 4.40 

When L’Hôpital’s Rule Does Not Apply 
Consider  Show that the limit cannot be evaluated by applying L’Hôpital’s rule. 

Solution 
Because the limits of the numerator and denominator are not both zero and are not both infinite, we cannot apply 
L’Hôpital’s rule. If we try to do so, we get 

and 

At which point we would conclude erroneously that 

However, since  and  we actually have 

We can conclude that 

 4.39 Explain why we cannot apply L’Hôpital’s rule to evaluate  Evaluate  by other means. 

Other Indeterminate Forms 
L’Hôpital’s rule is very useful for evaluating limits involving the indeterminate forms  and ∞ ∞  However, we can also 
use L’Hôpital’s rule to help evaluate limits involving other indeterminate forms that arise when evaluating limits. The 
expressions ∞  ∞ ∞  ∞  ∞  and  are all considered indeterminate forms. These expressions are not real 
numbers. Rather, they represent forms that arise when trying to evaluate certain limits. Next we realize why these are 
indeterminate forms and then understand how to use L’Hôpital’s rule in these cases. The key idea is that we must rewrite 



400     4 • Applications of Derivatives

the indeterminate forms in such a way that we arrive at the indeterminate form  or ∞ ∞

Indeterminate Form of Type ∞
Suppose we want to evaluate  where  and ∞  (or ∞  as  Since one term in 
the product is approaching zero but the other term is becoming arbitrarily large (in magnitude), anything can happen to 
the product. We use the notation ∞  to denote the form that arises in this situation. The expression ∞  is considered 
indeterminate because we cannot determine without further analysis the exact behavior of the product  as 

 For example, let  be a positive integer and consider 

As ∞   and ∞  However, the limit as ∞  of  varies, depending on  If 

 then  If  then ∞  If  then  Here we consider 
∞ ∞ ∞

another limit involving the indeterminate form ∞  and show how to rewrite the function as a quotient to use 
L’Hôpital’s rule. 

EXAMPLE 4.41 

Indeterminate Form of Type ∞
Evaluate 

Solution 
First, rewrite the function  as a quotient to apply L’Hôpital’s rule. If we write 

we see that ∞  as  and ∞  as  Therefore, we can apply L’Hôpital’s rule and obtain 

We conclude that 

Figure 4.72 Finding the limit at  of the function 

Access for free at openstax.org



4.8 • L’Hôpital’s Rule     401

 4.40 Evaluate 

Indeterminate Form of Type ∞ ∞
Another type of indeterminate form is ∞ ∞  Consider the following example. Let  be a positive integer and let 

 and  As ∞  ∞  and ∞  We are interested in 
∞

Depending on whether  grows faster,  grows faster, or they grow at the same rate, as we see next, anything can 
happen in this limit. Since ∞  and ∞  we write ∞ ∞  to denote the form of this limit. As with our other 
indeterminate forms, ∞ ∞  has no meaning on its own and we must do more analysis to determine the value of the 
limit. For example, suppose the exponent  in the function  is  then 

∞
∞ ∞

On the other hand, if  then 

∞ ∞

However, if  then 

∞
∞ ∞

Therefore, the limit cannot be determined by considering only ∞ ∞  Next we see how to rewrite an expression 
involving the indeterminate form ∞ ∞  as a fraction to apply L’Hôpital’s rule. 

EXAMPLE 4.42 

Indeterminate Form of Type ∞ ∞
Evaluate 

Solution 
By combining the fractions, we can write the function as a quotient. Since the least common denominator is  we 
have 

As  the numerator  and the denominator  Therefore, we can apply L’Hôpital’s rule. 
Taking the derivatives of the numerator and the denominator, we have 

As   and  Since the denominator is positive as  approaches zero from 
the right, we conclude that 

∞

Therefore, 

∞



402     4 • Applications of Derivatives

 4.41 Evaluate 

Another type of indeterminate form that arises when evaluating limits involves exponents. The expressions  ∞  and 
∞  are all indeterminate forms. On their own, these expressions are meaningless because we cannot actually evaluate 

these expressions as we would evaluate an expression involving real numbers. Rather, these expressions represent 
forms that arise when finding limits. Now we examine how L’Hôpital’s rule can be used to evaluate limits involving these 
indeterminate forms. 
Since L’Hôpital’s rule applies to quotients, we use the natural logarithm function and its properties to reduce a problem 
evaluating a limit involving exponents to a related problem involving a limit of a quotient. For example, suppose we want 
to evaluate  and we arrive at the indeterminate form ∞  (The indeterminate forms  and ∞  can be 
handled similarly.) We proceed as follows. Let 

Then, 

Therefore, 

Since ∞  we know that ∞  Therefore,  is of the indeterminate form ∞
and we can use the techniques discussed earlier to rewrite the expression  in a form so that we can apply 
L’Hôpital’s rule. Suppose  where  may be ∞  or ∞  Then 

Since the natural logarithm function is continuous, we conclude that 

which gives us 

EXAMPLE 4.43 

Indeterminate Form of Type ∞
Evaluate 

∞

Solution 
Let  Then, 

We need to evaluate  Applying L’Hôpital’s rule, we obtain 
∞

∞ ∞ ∞

Therefore,  Since the natural logarithm function is continuous, we conclude that 
∞

Access for free at openstax.org



4.8 • L’Hôpital’s Rule     403

∞

which leads to 

∞

Hence, 

∞

 4.42 Evaluate 
∞

EXAMPLE 4.44 

Indeterminate Form of Type 
Evaluate 

Solution 
Let 

Therefore, 

We now evaluate  Since  and ∞  we have the indeterminate form ∞  To 

apply L’Hôpital’s rule, we need to rewrite  as a fraction. We could write 

or 

Let’s consider the first option. In this case, applying L’Hôpital’s rule, we would obtain 

Unfortunately, we not only have another expression involving the indeterminate form ∞  but the new limit is even 
more complicated to evaluate than the one with which we started. Instead, we try the second option. By writing 

and applying L’Hôpital’s rule, we obtain 

Using the fact that  and  we can rewrite the expression on the right-hand side as 



404     4 • Applications of Derivatives

We conclude that  Therefore,  and we have 

Hence, 

 4.43 Evaluate 

Growth Rates of Functions 
Suppose the functions  and  both approach infinity as ∞  Although the values of both functions become 
arbitrarily large as the values of  become sufficiently large, sometimes one function is growing more quickly than the 
other. For example,  and  both approach infinity as ∞  However, as shown in the following 
table, the values of  are growing much faster than the values of 

Table 4.7 Comparing the Growth Rates of  and 

In fact, 

∞
∞ ∞ ∞ ∞

As a result, we say  is growing more rapidly than  as ∞  On the other hand, for  and 
 although the values of  are always greater than the values of  for  each value of 

 is roughly three times the corresponding value of  as ∞  as shown in the following table. In fact, 

∞

Table 4.8 Comparing the Growth Rates of  and 

In this case, we say that  and  are growing at the same rate as ∞

More generally, suppose  and  are two functions that approach infinity as ∞  We say  grows more rapidly than 

Access for free at openstax.org



4.8 • L’Hôpital’s Rule     405

as ∞  if 

∞
∞ ∞

On the other hand, if there exists a constant  such that 

∞

we say  and  grow at the same rate as ∞
Next we see how to use L’Hôpital’s rule to compare the growth rates of power, exponential, and logarithmic functions. 

EXAMPLE 4.45 

Comparing the Growth Rates of   and 
For each of the following pairs of functions, use L’Hôpital’s rule to evaluate 

∞

a. 
b. 

Solution 
a. Since ∞  and ∞  we can use L’Hôpital’s rule to evaluate  We obtain 

∞ ∞ ∞

∞ ∞

Since ∞  and ∞  we can apply L’Hôpital’s rule again. Since 
∞ ∞

∞ ∞

we conclude that 

∞

Therefore,  grows more rapidly than  as ∞  (See Figure 4.73 and Table 4.9). 

Figure 4.73 An exponential function grows at a faster rate than a power function. 



406     4 • Applications of Derivatives

Table 4.9 Growth rates of a power function and an 
exponential function. 

b. Since ∞  and ∞  we can use L’Hôpital’s rule to evaluate  We obtain 
∞ ∞ ∞

∞ ∞ ∞

Thus,  grows more rapidly than  as ∞  (see Figure 4.74 and Table 4.10). 

Figure 4.74 A power function grows at a faster rate than a logarithmic function. 

Table 4.10 Growth rates of a power function and a 
logarithmic function 

 4.44 Compare the growth rates of  and 

Using the same ideas as in Example 4.45a. it is not difficult to show that  grows more rapidly than  for any  In 
Figure 4.75 and Table 4.11, we compare  with  and  as ∞

Access for free at openstax.org



4.8 • L’Hôpital’s Rule     407

Figure 4.75 The exponential function  grows faster than  for any  (a) A comparison of  with  (b) A 
comparison of  with 

Table 4.11 An exponential function grows at a faster 
rate than any power function 

Similarly, it is not difficult to show that  grows more rapidly than  for any  In Figure 4.76 and Table 4.12, we 
compare  with  and 

Figure 4.76 The function  grows more slowly than  for any  as ∞

Table 4.12 A logarithmic function grows at a 
slower rate than any root function 



408     4 • Applications of Derivatives

 SECTION 4.8 EXERCISES 
For the following exercises, evaluate the limit. 

356. Evaluate the limit  357 . Evaluate the limit  358 . Evaluate the limit 
∞

∞ ∞

359. Evaluate the limit  360 . Evaluate the limit  361 . Evaluate the limit 
. . . 

For the following exercises, determine whether you can apply L’Hôpital’s rule directly. Explain why or why not. Then, 
indicate if there is some way you can alter the limit so you can apply L’Hôpital’s rule. 

362.  363 .  364 . 
∞

365.  366 . 
∞

For the following exercises, evaluate the limits with either L’Hôpital’s rule or previously learned methods. 

367.  368 .  369 . 

370.  371 .  372 . 

373.  374 .  375 . 

376.  377 .  378 . 

379.  380 .  381 . 

382.  383 .  384 . 
∞

385.  386 .  387 . 
∞ ∞

388.  389 .  390 . 

391.  392 .  393 . 
∞

394.  395 . 
∞

For the following exercises, use a calculator to graph the function and estimate the value of the limit, then use L’Hôpital’s 
rule to find the limit directly. 

396. [T]  397 . [T]  398 . [T] 

399. [T]  400 . [T]  401 . [T] 

402. [T]  403 . [T]  404 . [T] 

Access for free at openstax.org



4.9 • Newton’s Method     409

405. [T] 

4.9 Newton’s Method 
Learning Objectives 

4.9.1 Describe the steps of Newton’s method. 
4.9.2 Explain what an iterative process means. 
4.9.3 Recognize when Newton’s method does not work. 
4.9.4 Apply iterative processes to various situations. 

In many areas of pure and applied mathematics, we are interested in finding solutions to an equation of the form 
 For most functions, however, it is difficult—if not impossible—to calculate their zeroes explicitly. In this section, 

we take a look at a technique that provides a very efficient way of approximating the zeroes of functions. This technique 
makes use of tangent line approximations and is behind the method used often by calculators and computers to find 
zeroes. 

Describing Newton’s Method 
Consider the task of finding the solutions of  If  is the first-degree polynomial  then the 
solution of  is given by the formula  If  is the second-degree polynomial  the 
solutions of  can be found by using the quadratic formula. However, for polynomials of degree  or more, 
finding roots of  becomes more complicated. Although formulas exist for third- and fourth-degree polynomials, they 
are quite complicated. Also, if  is a polynomial of degree  or greater, it is known that no such formulas exist. For 
example, consider the function 

No formula exists that allows us to find the solutions of  Similar difficulties exist for nonpolynomial functions. 
For example, consider the task of finding solutions of  No simple formula exists for the solutions of this 
equation. In cases such as these, we can use Newton’s method to approximate the roots. 
Newton’s method makes use of the following idea to approximate the solutions of  By sketching a graph of 
we can estimate a root of  Let’s call this estimate  We then draw the tangent line to  at  If 
this tangent line intersects the -axis at some point  Now let  be the next approximation to the actual root. 
Typically,  is closer than  to an actual root. Next we draw the tangent line to  at  If  this tangent line 
also intersects the -axis, producing another approximation,  We continue in this way, deriving a list of 
approximations:  Typically, the numbers  quickly approach an actual root  as shown in the 
following figure. 



410     4 • Applications of Derivatives

Figure 4.77 The approximations  approach the actual root  The approximations are derived by looking at 
tangent lines to the graph of 
Now let’s look at how to calculate the approximations  If  is our first approximation, the approximation 

 is defined by letting  be the -intercept of the tangent line to  at  The equation of this tangent line is given 
by 

Therefore,  must satisfy 

Solving this equation for  we conclude that 

Similarly, the point  is the -intercept of the tangent line to  at  Therefore,  satisfies the equation 

In general, for  satisfies 

(4.8) 

Next we see how to make use of this technique to approximate the root of the polynomial 

EXAMPLE 4.46 

Finding a Root of a Polynomial 
Use Newton’s method to approximate a root of  in the interval  Let  and find 

 and 

Solution 
From Figure 4.78, we see that  has one root over the interval  Therefore  seems like a reasonable first 
approximation. To find the next approximation, we use Equation 4.8. Since  the derivative is 

Access for free at openstax.org



4.9 • Newton’s Method     411

 Using Equation 4.8 with  (and a calculator that displays  digits), we obtain 

To find the next approximation,  we use Equation 4.8 with  and the value of  stored on the calculator. We find 
that 

Continuing in this way, we obtain the following results: 

We note that we obtained the same value for  and  Therefore, any subsequent application of Newton’s method will 
most likely give the same value for 

Figure 4.78 The function  has one root over the interval 

 4.45 Letting  let’s use Newton’s method to approximate the root of  over the interval 
 by calculating  and 

Newton’s method can also be used to approximate square roots. Here we show how to approximate  This method 
can be modified to approximate the square root of any positive number. 

EXAMPLE 4.47 

Finding a Square Root 
Use Newton’s method to approximate  (Figure 4.79). Let  let  and calculate 
(We note that since  has a zero at  the initial value  is a reasonable choice to approximate 

Solution 
For  From Equation 4.8, we know that 



412     4 • Applications of Derivatives

Therefore, 

Continuing in this way, we find that 

Since we obtained the same value for  and  it is unlikely that the value  will change on any subsequent 
application of Newton’s method. We conclude that 

Figure 4.79 We can use Newton’s method to find 

 4.46 Use Newton’s method to approximate  by letting  and  Find  and 

When using Newton’s method, each approximation after the initial guess is defined in terms of the previous 
approximation by using the same formula. In particular, by defining the function  we can rewrite 
Equation 4.8 as  This type of process, where each  is defined in terms of  by repeating the same 
function, is an example of an iterative process. Shortly, we examine other iterative processes. First, let’s look at the 

Access for free at openstax.org



4.9 • Newton’s Method     413

reasons why Newton’s method could fail to find a root. 

Failures of Newton’s Method 
Typically, Newton’s method is used to find roots fairly quickly. However, things can go wrong. Some reasons why 
Newton’s method might fail include the following: 
1. At one of the approximations  the derivative  is zero at  but  As a result, the tangent line of  at 

 does not intersect the -axis. Therefore, we cannot continue the iterative process. 
2. The approximations  may approach a different root. If the function  has more than one root, it is 

possible that our approximations do not approach the one for which we are looking, but approach a different root 
(see Figure 4.80). This event most often occurs when we do not choose the approximation  close enough to the 
desired root. 

3. The approximations may fail to approach a root entirely. In Example 4.48, we provide an example of a function and 
an initial guess  such that the successive approximations never approach a root because the successive 
approximations continue to alternate back and forth between two values. 

Figure 4.80 If the initial guess  is too far from the root sought, it may lead to approximations that approach a different 
root. 

EXAMPLE 4.48 

When Newton’s Method Fails 
Consider the function  Let  Show that the sequence  fails to approach a root of 

Solution 
For  the derivative is  Therefore, 

In the next step, 

Consequently, the numbers  continue to bounce back and forth between  and  and never get closer to the 
root of  which is over the interval  (see Figure 4.81). Fortunately, if we choose an initial approximation  closer 
to the actual root, we can avoid this situation. 



414     4 • Applications of Derivatives

Figure 4.81 The approximations continue to alternate between  and never approach the root of 

 4.47 For  let  and find  and 

From Example 4.48, we see that Newton’s method does not always work. However, when it does work, the sequence of 
approximations approaches the root very quickly. Discussions of how quickly the sequence of approximations approach 
a root found using Newton’s method are included in texts on numerical analysis. 

Other Iterative Processes 
As mentioned earlier, Newton’s method is a type of iterative process. We now look at an example of a different type of 
iterative process. 
Consider a function  and an initial number  Define the subsequent numbers  by the formula  This 
process is an iterative process that creates a list of numbers  This list of numbers may approach a 
finite number  as  gets larger, or it may not. In Example 4.49, we see an example of a function  and an initial guess 

 such that the resulting list of numbers approaches a finite value. 

EXAMPLE 4.49 

Finding a Limit for an Iterative Process 
Let  and let  For all  let  Find the values  Make a conjecture 
about what happens to this list of numbers  as ∞  If the list of numbers  approaches 
a finite number  then  satisfies  and  is called a fixed point of 

Solution 
If  then 

Access for free at openstax.org



4.9 • Newton’s Method     415

From this list, we conjecture that the values  approach 

Figure 4.82 provides a graphical argument that the values approach  as ∞  Starting at the point  we draw 
a vertical line to the point  The next number in our list is  We use  to calculate  Therefore, 
we draw a horizontal line connecting  to the point  on the line  and then draw a vertical line 
connecting  to the point  The output  becomes  Continuing in this way, we could create an 
infinite number of line segments. These line segments are trapped between the lines  and  The line 
segments get closer to the intersection point of these two lines, which occurs when  Solving the equation 

 we conclude they intersect at  Therefore, our graphical evidence agrees with our numerical evidence 
that the list of numbers  approaches  as ∞

Figure 4.82 This iterative process approaches the value 

 4.48 Consider the function  Let  and let  for  Find 
Make a conjecture about what happens to the list of numbers  as ∞

STUDENT PROJECT 

Iterative Processes and Chaos 
Iterative processes can yield some very interesting behavior. In this section, we have seen several examples of 
iterative processes that converge to a fixed point. We also saw in Example 4.48 that the iterative process bounced 
back and forth between two values. We call this kind of behavior a -cycle. Iterative processes can converge to cycles 
with various periodicities, such as  (where the iterative process repeats a sequence of four 
values), 8-cycles, and so on. 

Some iterative processes yield what mathematicians call chaos. In this case, the iterative process jumps from value to 
value in a seemingly random fashion and never converges or settles into a cycle. Although a complete exploration of 
chaos is beyond the scope of this text, in this project we look at one of the key properties of a chaotic iterative 
process: sensitive dependence on initial conditions. This property refers to the concept that small changes in initial 
conditions can generate drastically different behavior in the iterative process. 

Probably the best-known example of chaos is the Mandelbrot set (see Figure 4.83), named after Benoit Mandelbrot 
(1924–2010), who investigated its properties and helped popularize the field of chaos theory. The Mandelbrot set is 
usually generated by computer and shows fascinating details on enlargement, including self-replication of the set. 
Several colorized versions of the set have been shown in museums and can be found online and in popular books on 
the subject. 



416     4 • Applications of Derivatives

Figure 4.83 The Mandelbrot set is a well-known example of a set of points generated by the iterative chaotic behavior 
of a relatively simple function. 

In this project we use the logistic map 

as the function in our iterative process. The logistic map is a deceptively simple function; but, depending on the value 
of  the resulting iterative process displays some very interesting behavior. It can lead to fixed points, cycles, and 
even chaos. 

To visualize the long-term behavior of the iterative process associated with the logistic map, we will use a tool called a 
cobweb diagram. As we did with the iterative process we examined earlier in this section, we first draw a vertical line 
from the point  to the point  We then draw a horizontal line from that point to the point 

 then draw a vertical line to  and continue the process until the long-term behavior of 
the system becomes apparent. Figure 4.84 shows the long-term behavior of the logistic map when  and 

 (The first  iterations are not plotted.) The long-term behavior of this iterative process is an -cycle. 

Access for free at openstax.org



4.9 • Newton’s Method     417

Figure 4.84 A cobweb diagram for  is presented here. The sequence of values results in an 
-cycle. 

1. Let  and choose  Either by hand or by using a computer, calculate the first  values in the 
sequence. Does the sequence appear to converge? If so, to what value? Does it result in a cycle? If so, what kind 
of cycle (for example, 

2. What happens when 
3. For  and  calculate the first  sequence values. Generate a cobweb diagram for each iterative 

process. (Several free applets are available online that generate cobweb diagrams for the logistic map.) What is 
the long-term behavior in each of these cases? 

4. Now let  Calculate the first  sequence values and generate a cobweb diagram. What is the long-term 
behavior in this case? 

5. Repeat the process for  but let  How does this behavior compare with the behavior for 

 SECTION 4.9 EXERCISES 
For the following exercises, write Newton’s formula as  for solving 

406.  407 .  408 . 

409.  410 . 

For the following exercises, solve  using the iteration  which differs slightly from Newton’s 
method. Find a  that works and a  that fails to converge, with the exception of 

411.  with  412 .  with  413 . What is the value of 
for Newton’s method? 

For the following exercises, start at 

a.  and 

b. 

Compute  and  using the specified iterative method. 

414.  415 .  416 . 

417.  418 .  419 . 



418     4 • Applications of Derivatives

420.  421 . 

For the following exercises, solve to four decimal places using Newton’s method and a computer or calculator. Choose 
any initial guess  that is not the exact root. 

422.  423 .  424 . 

425.  426 .  427 .  choose 

428.  429 .  430 . 

431. 

For the following exercises, use Newton’s method to find the fixed points of the function where  round to three 
decimals. 

432.  433 .  on  434 . 

435. 

Newton’s method can be used to find maxima and minima of functions in addition to the roots. In this case apply 
Newton’s method to the derivative function  to find its roots, instead of the original function. For the following 
exercises, consider the formulation of the method. 
436. To find candidates for  437 . What additional 

maxima and minima, we restrictions are necessary 
need to find the critical on the function 
points  Show 
that to solve for the 
critical points of a 
function  Newton’s 
method is given by 

For the following exercises, use Newton’s method to find the location of the local minima and/or maxima of the following 
functions; round to three decimals. 

438. Minimum of  439 . Minimum of  440 . Minimum of 

441. Maximum of  442 . Maximum of  443 . Maximum of 

444. Minimum of  445 . Minimum of 
 closest 

non-zero minimum to 

For the following exercises, use the specified method to solve the equation. If it does not work, explain why it does not 
work. 
446. Newton’s method,  447 . Newton’s method,  448 . Newton’s method, 

 starting at 

449. Solving 
starting at 

Access for free at openstax.org



4.10 • Antiderivatives     419

For the following exercises, use the secant method, an alternative iterative method to Newton’s method. The formula is 
given by 

450. Find a root to  451 . Find a root to  452 . Find a root to 
 accurate  accurate to accurate to four decimal 

to three decimal places. four decimal places. places. 

453. Find a root to  454 . Why would you use the 
 accurate to secant method over 

four decimal places. Newton’s method? What 
are the necessary 
restrictions on 

For the following exercises, use both Newton’s method and the secant method to calculate a root for the following 
equations. Use a calculator or computer to calculate how many iterations of each are needed to reach within three 
decimal places of the exact answer. For the secant method, use the first guess from Newton’s method. 

455.  456 .  457 . 

458.  459 . 

In the following exercises, consider Kepler’s equation regarding planetary orbits,  where  is the 
mean anomaly,  is eccentric anomaly, and  measures eccentricity. 
460. Use Newton’s method to  461 . Use Newton’s method to 

solve for the eccentric solve for the eccentric 
anomaly  when the anomaly  when the 
mean anomaly mean anomaly 
and the eccentricity of the and the eccentricity of the 
orbit  round to orbit  round to 
three decimals. three decimals. 

The following two exercises consider a bank investment. The initial investment is  After  years, the investment 
has tripled to 
462. Use Newton’s method to  463 . Use Newton’s method to  464 . The total cost for printing 

determine the interest determine the interest books can be given by the 
rate if the interest was rate if the interest was equation 
compounded annually. compounded 

continuously. Use Newton’s method to find 
the break-even point if the 
printer sells each book for 

4.10 Antiderivatives 
Learning Objectives 

4.10.1 Find the general antiderivative of a given function. 
4.10.2 Explain the terms and notation used for an indefinite integral. 
4.10.3 State the power rule for integrals. 
4.10.4 Use antidifferentiation to solve simple initial-value problems. 

At this point, we have seen how to calculate derivatives of many functions and have been introduced to a variety of their 
applications. We now ask a question that turns this process around: Given a function  how do we find a function with 
the derivative  and why would we be interested in such a function? 
We answer the first part of this question by defining antiderivatives. The antiderivative of a function  is a function with a 
derivative  Why are we interested in antiderivatives? The need for antiderivatives arises in many situations, and we 
look at various examples throughout the remainder of the text. Here we examine one specific example that involves 
rectilinear motion. In our examination in Derivatives of rectilinear motion, we showed that given a position function 



420     4 • Applications of Derivatives

of an object, then its velocity function  is the derivative of —that is,  Furthermore, the acceleration 
 is the derivative of the velocity —that is,  Now suppose we are given an acceleration 

function  but not the velocity function  or the position function  Since  determining the velocity 
function requires us to find an antiderivative of the acceleration function. Then, since  determining the 
position function requires us to find an antiderivative of the velocity function. Rectilinear motion is just one case in which 
the need for antiderivatives arises. We will see many more examples throughout the remainder of the text. For now, let’s 
look at the terminology and notation for antiderivatives, and determine the antiderivatives for several types of functions. 
We examine various techniques for finding antiderivatives of more complicated functions later in the text (Introduction 
to Techniques of Integration (http://openstax.org/books/calculus-volume-2/pages/3-introduction)). 

The Reverse of Differentiation 
At this point, we know how to find derivatives of various functions. We now ask the opposite question. Given a function 

 how can we find a function with derivative  If we can find a function  with derivative  we call  an antiderivative 
of 

Definition 

A function  is an antiderivative of the function  if 

for all  in the domain of 

Consider the function  Knowing the power rule of differentiation, we conclude that  is an 
antiderivative of  since  Are there any other antiderivatives of  Yes; since the derivative of any constant 
is zero,  is also an antiderivative of  Therefore,  and  are also antiderivatives. Are there any 
others that are not of the form  for some constant  The answer is no. From Corollary  of the Mean Value 
Theorem, we know that if  and  are differentiable functions such that  then  for 
some constant  This fact leads to the following important theorem. 

Theorem 4.14 

General Form of an Antiderivative 
Let  be an antiderivative of  over an interval  Then, 

i. for each constant  the function  is also an antiderivative of  over 
ii. if  is an antiderivative of  over  there is a constant  for which  over 

In other words, the most general form of the antiderivative of  over  is 

We use this fact and our knowledge of derivatives to find all the antiderivatives for several functions. 

EXAMPLE 4.50 

Finding Antiderivatives 
For each of the following functions, find all antiderivatives. 

a. 
b. 
c. 
d. 

Solution 
a. Because 

Access for free at openstax.org



4.10 • Antiderivatives     421

then  is an antiderivative of  Therefore, every antiderivative of  is of the form  for some 
constant  and every function of the form  is an antiderivative of 

b. Let  For  and 

For  and 

Therefore, 

Thus,  is an antiderivative of  Therefore, every antiderivative of  is of the form  for some 
constant  and every function of the form  is an antiderivative of 

c. We have 

so  is an antiderivative of  Therefore, every antiderivative of  is of the form  for some 
constant  and every function of the form  is an antiderivative of 

d. Since 

then  is an antiderivative of  Therefore, every antiderivative of  is of the form  for some 
constant  and every function of the form  is an antiderivative of 

 4.49 Find all antiderivatives of 

Indefinite Integrals 
We now look at the formal notation used to represent antiderivatives and examine some of their properties. These 
properties allow us to find antiderivatives of more complicated functions. Given a function  we use the notation 
or  to denote the derivative of  Here we introduce notation for antiderivatives. If  is an antiderivative of  we say 
that  is the most general antiderivative of  and write 

The symbol  is called an integral sign, and  is called the indefinite integral of 

Definition 

Given a function  the indefinite integral of  denoted 

is the most general antiderivative of  If  is an antiderivative of  then 



422     4 • Applications of Derivatives

The expression  is called the integrand and the variable  is the variable of integration. 

Given the terminology introduced in this definition, the act of finding the antiderivatives of a function  is usually 
referred to as integrating 
For a function  and an antiderivative  the functions  where  is any real number, is often referred to as the 
family of antiderivatives of  For example, since  is an antiderivative of  and any antiderivative of  is of the form 

 we write 

The collection of all functions of the form  where  is any real number, is known as the family of antiderivatives of 
 Figure 4.85 shows a graph of this family of antiderivatives. 

Figure 4.85 The family of antiderivatives of  consists of all functions of the form  where  is any real number. 
For some functions, evaluating indefinite integrals follows directly from properties of derivatives. For example, for 

which comes directly from 

This fact is known as the power rule for integrals. 

Theorem 4.15 

Power Rule for Integrals 
For 

Access for free at openstax.org



4.10 • Antiderivatives     423

Evaluating indefinite integrals for some other functions is also a straightforward calculation. The following table lists the 
indefinite integrals for several common functions. A more complete list appears in Appendix A. 

Differentiation Formula Indefinite Integral 

 for 

Table 4.13 Integration Formulas 

From the definition of indefinite integral of  we know 

if and only if  is an antiderivative of  Therefore, when claiming that 



424     4 • Applications of Derivatives

it is important to check whether this statement is correct by verifying that 

EXAMPLE 4.51 

Verifying an Indefinite Integral 
Each of the following statements is of the form  Verify that each statement is correct by showing 

that 

a. 

b. 

Solution 
a. Since 

the statement 

is correct. 
Note that we are verifying an indefinite integral for a sum. Furthermore,  and  are antiderivatives of  and 
respectively, and the sum of the antiderivatives is an antiderivative of the sum. We discuss this fact again later in 
this section. 

b. Using the product rule, we see that 

Therefore, the statement 

is correct. 
Note that we are verifying an indefinite integral for a product. The antiderivative  is not a product of the 
antiderivatives. Furthermore, the product of antiderivatives,  is not an antiderivative of  since 

In general, the product of antiderivatives is not an antiderivative of a product. 

 4.50 Verify that 

In Table 4.13, we listed the indefinite integrals for many elementary functions. Let’s now turn our attention to evaluating 
indefinite integrals for more complicated functions. For example, consider finding an antiderivative of a sum  In 
Example 4.51a. we showed that an antiderivative of the sum  is given by the sum —that is, an 
antiderivative of a sum is given by a sum of antiderivatives. This result was not specific to this example. In general, if 
and  are antiderivatives of any functions  and  respectively, then 

Access for free at openstax.org



4.10 • Antiderivatives     425

Therefore,  is an antiderivative of  and we have 

Similarly, 

In addition, consider the task of finding an antiderivative of  where  is any real number. Since 

for any real number  we conclude that 

These properties are summarized next. 

Theorem 4.16 

Properties of Indefinite Integrals 
Let  and  be antiderivatives of  and  respectively, and let  be any real number. 

Sums and Differences 

Constant Multiples 

From this theorem, we can evaluate any integral involving a sum, difference, or constant multiple of functions with 
antiderivatives that are known. Evaluating integrals involving products, quotients, or compositions is more complicated 
(see Example 4.51b. for an example involving an antiderivative of a product.) We look at and address integrals involving 
these more complicated functions in Introduction to Integration. In the next example, we examine how to use this 
theorem to calculate the indefinite integrals of several functions. 

EXAMPLE 4.52 

Evaluating Indefinite Integrals 
Evaluate each of the following indefinite integrals: 

a. 

b. 

c. 

d. 

Solution 
a. Using Properties of Indefinite Integrals, we can integrate each of the four terms in the integrand separately. We 

obtain 



426     4 • Applications of Derivatives

From the second part of Properties of Indefinite Integrals, each coefficient can be written in front of the integral 
sign, which gives 

Using the power rule for integrals, we conclude that 

b. Rewrite the integrand as 

Then, to evaluate the integral, integrate each of these terms separately. Using the power rule, we have 

c. Using Properties of Indefinite Integrals, write the integral as 

Then, use the fact that  is an antiderivative of  to conclude that 

d. Rewrite the integrand as 

Therefore, 

 4.51 Evaluate 

Initial-Value Problems 
We look at techniques for integrating a large variety of functions involving products, quotients, and compositions later in 
the text. Here we turn to one common use for antiderivatives that arises often in many applications: solving differential 
equations. 
A differential equation is an equation that relates an unknown function and one or more of its derivatives. The equation 

(4.9) 

is a simple example of a differential equation. Solving this equation means finding a function  with a derivative 
Therefore, the solutions of Equation 4.9 are the antiderivatives of  If  is one antiderivative of  every function of the 
form  is a solution of that differential equation. For example, the solutions of 

Access for free at openstax.org



4.10 • Antiderivatives     427

are given by 

Sometimes we are interested in determining whether a particular solution curve passes through a certain point 
—that is,  The problem of finding a function  that satisfies a differential equation 

(4.10) 

with the additional condition 

(4.11) 

is an example of an initial-value problem. The condition  is known as an initial condition. For example, 
looking for a function  that satisfies the differential equation 

and the initial condition 

is an example of an initial-value problem. Since the solutions of the differential equation are  to find a 
function  that also satisfies the initial condition, we need to find  such that  From this equation, 
we see that  and we conclude that  is the solution of this initial-value problem as shown in the 
following graph. 

Figure 4.86 Some of the solution curves of the differential equation  are displayed. The function 
satisfies the differential equation and the initial condition 

EXAMPLE 4.53 

Solving an Initial-Value Problem 
Solve the initial-value problem 



428     4 • Applications of Derivatives

Solution 
First we need to solve the differential equation. If  then 

Next we need to look for a solution  that satisfies the initial condition. The initial condition  means we need a 
constant  such that  Therefore, 

The solution of the initial-value problem is 

 4.52 Solve the initial value problem 

Initial-value problems arise in many applications. Next we consider a problem in which a driver applies the brakes in a 
car. We are interested in how long it takes for the car to stop. Recall that the velocity function  is the derivative of a 
position function  and the acceleration  is the derivative of the velocity function. In earlier examples in the text, 
we could calculate the velocity from the position and then compute the acceleration from the velocity. In the next 
example we work the other way around. Given an acceleration function, we calculate the velocity function. We then use 
the velocity function to determine the position function. 

EXAMPLE 4.54 

Decelerating Car 
A car is traveling at the rate of  ft/sec  mph) when the brakes are applied. The car begins decelerating at a constant 
rate of  ft/sec2. 
a. How many seconds elapse before the car stops? 
b. How far does the car travel during that time? 

Solution 
a. First we introduce variables for this problem. Let  be the time (in seconds) after the brakes are first applied. Let 

be the acceleration of the car (in feet per seconds squared) at time  Let  be the velocity of the car (in feet per 
second) at time  Let  be the car’s position (in feet) beyond the point where the brakes are applied at time 
The car is traveling at a rate of  Therefore, the initial velocity is  ft/sec. Since the car is 
decelerating, the acceleration is 

The acceleration is the derivative of the velocity, 

Therefore, we have an initial-value problem to solve: 

Integrating, we find that 

Since  Thus, the velocity function is 

To find how long it takes for the car to stop, we need to find the time  such that the velocity is zero. Solving 
 we obtain  sec. 

b. To find how far the car travels during this time, we need to find the position of the car after  sec. We know the 
velocity  is the derivative of the position  Consider the initial position to be  Therefore, we need to 

Access for free at openstax.org



4.10 • Antiderivatives     429

solve the initial-value problem 

Integrating, we have 

Since  the constant is  Therefore, the position function is 

After  sec, the position is  ft. 

 4.53 Suppose the car is traveling at the rate of  ft/sec. How long does it take for the car to stop? How far will 
the car travel? 

 SECTION 4.10 EXERCISES 
For the following exercises, show that  are antiderivatives of 

465.  466 . 

467.  468 .  469 . 

For the following exercises, find the general form for the antiderivative of the function. 

470.  471 .  472 . 

473. 

For the following exercises, find the general form for the antiderivative  of each function 

474.  475 .  476 . 

477.  478 .  479 . 

480.  481 .  482 . 

483.  484 .  485 . 

486.  487 .  488 . 

489. 

For the following exercises, evaluate the integral. 

490.  491 .  492 . 

493.  494 .  495 . 

496.  497 .  498 . 



430     4 • Applications of Derivatives

For the following exercises, solve the initial value problem. 

499.  500 . 

501.  502 . 

503. 

For the following exercises, find two possible functions  given the second- or third-order derivatives. 

504.  505 .  506 . 

507.  508 .  509 . A car is being driven at a 
rate of  mph when the 
brakes are applied. The 
car decelerates at a 
constant rate of  ft/
sec2. How long before the 
car stops? 

510. In the preceding problem,  511 . You are merging onto the  512 . Based on the previous 
calculate how far the car freeway, accelerating problem, how far does 
travels in the time it takes from rest at a constant the car travel to reach 
to stop. rate of  ft/sec2. How merging speed? 

long does it take you to 
reach merging speed at 

 mph? 
513. A car company wants to  514 . A car company wants to 

ensure its newest model ensure its newest model 
can stop in  sec when can stop in less than 
traveling at  mph. If we ft when traveling at 
assume constant mph. If we assume 
deceleration, find the constant deceleration, 
value of deceleration that find the value of 
accomplishes this. deceleration that 

accomplishes this. 

For the following exercises, find the antiderivative of the function, assuming 

515. [T]  516 . [T]  517 . [T] 

518. [T]  519 . [T]  520 . [T] 

For the following exercises, determine whether the statement is true or false. Either prove it is true or find a 
counterexample if it is false. 
521. If  is the  522 . If  is the  523 . If  is the 

antiderivative of antiderivative of antiderivative of 
then  is the then  is the then  is the 
antiderivative of antiderivative of antiderivative of 

524. If  is the 
antiderivative of 
then  is the 
antiderivative of 

Access for free at openstax.org



4 • Chapter Review     431

Chapter Review 
Key Terms 
absolute extremum  if  has an absolute maximum or absolute minimum at  we say  has an absolute extremum at 

absolute maximum  if  for all  in the domain of  we say  has an absolute maximum at 
absolute minimum  if  for all  in the domain of  we say  has an absolute minimum at 
antiderivative  a function  such that  for all  in the domain of  is an antiderivative of 
concave down  if  is differentiable over an interval  and  is decreasing over  then  is concave down over 
concave up  if  is differentiable over an interval  and  is increasing over  then  is concave up over 
concavity  the upward or downward curve of the graph of a function 
concavity test  suppose  is twice differentiable over an interval  if  over  then  is concave up over  if 

 over  then  is concave down over 
critical number  if  or  is undefined, we say that  is a critical number of 
critical point  the point  a critical point of 
differential  the differential  is an independent variable that can be assigned any nonzero real number; the 

differential  is defined to be 
differential form  given a differentiable function  the equation  is the differential form of the 

derivative of  with respect to 
end behavior  the behavior of a function as ∞  and ∞
extreme value theorem  if  is a continuous function over a finite, closed interval, then  has an absolute maximum 

and an absolute minimum 
Fermat’s theorem  if  has a local extremum at  then  is a critical point of 
first derivative test  let  be a continuous function over an interval  containing a critical point  such that  is 

differentiable over  except possibly at  if  changes sign from positive to negative as  increases through  then 
has a local maximum at  if  changes sign from negative to positive as  increases through  then  has a local 
minimum at  if  does not change sign as  increases through  then  does not have a local extremum at 

horizontal asymptote  if  or  then  is a horizontal asymptote of 
∞ ∞

indefinite integral  the most general antiderivative of  is the indefinite integral of  we use the notation 
 to denote the indefinite integral of 

indeterminate forms  when evaluating a limit, the forms  ∞ ∞  ∞  ∞ ∞   ∞  and ∞  are considered 
indeterminate because further analysis is required to determine whether the limit exists and, if so, what its value is 

infinite limit at infinity  a function that becomes arbitrarily large as x becomes large 
inflection point  if  is continuous at  and  changes concavity at  the point  is an inflection point of 
initial value problem  a problem that requires finding a function  that satisfies the differential equation 

together with the initial condition 
iterative process  process in which a list of numbers  is generated by starting with a number  and 

defining  for 
L’Hôpital’s rule  if  and  are differentiable functions over an interval  except possibly at  and 

 or  and  are infinite, then  assuming the limit on the 

right exists or is ∞  or ∞
limit at infinity  the limiting value, if it exists, of a function as ∞  or ∞
linear approximation  the linear function  is the linear approximation of  at 
local extremum  if  has a local maximum or local minimum at  we say  has a local extremum at 
local maximum  if there exists an interval  such that  for all  we say  has a local maximum at 
local minimum  if there exists an interval  such that  for all  we say  has a local minimum at 
mean value theorem  if  is continuous over  and differentiable over  then there exists  such that 

Newton’s method  method for approximating roots of  using an initial guess  each subsequent 
approximation is defined by the equation 



432     4 • Chapter Review

oblique asymptote  the line  if  approaches it as ∞  or ∞
optimization problems  problems that are solved by finding the maximum or minimum value of a function 
percentage error  the relative error expressed as a percentage 
propagated error  the error that results in a calculated quantity  resulting from a measurement error dx 
related rates  are rates of change associated with two or more related quantities that are changing over time 
relative error  given an absolute error  for a particular quantity,  is the relative error. 
rolle’s theorem  if  is continuous over  and differentiable over  and if  then there exists 

 such that 
second derivative test  suppose  and  is continuous over an interval containing  if  then  has 

a local minimum at  if  then  has a local maximum at  if  then the test is inconclusive 
tangent line approximation (linearization)  since the linear approximation of  at  is defined using the equation 

of the tangent line, the linear approximation of  at  is also known as the tangent line approximation to  at 

Key Equations 

Linear approximation 

A differential 

Key Concepts 
4.1 Related Rates 

• To solve a related rates problem, first draw a picture that illustrates the relationship between the two or more 
related quantities that are changing with respect to time. 

• In terms of the quantities, state the information given and the rate to be found. 
• Find an equation relating the quantities. 
• Use differentiation, applying the chain rule as necessary, to find an equation that relates the rates. 
• Be sure not to substitute a variable quantity for one of the variables until after finding an equation relating the 

rates. 

4.2 Linear Approximations and Differentials 
• A differentiable function  can be approximated at  by the linear function 

• For a function  if  changes from  to  then 

is an approximation for the change in  The actual change in  is 

• A measurement error  can lead to an error in a calculated quantity  The error in the calculated quantity is 
known as the propagated error. The propagated error can be estimated by 

• To estimate the relative error of a particular quantity  we estimate 

4.3 Maxima and Minima 
• A function may have both an absolute maximum and an absolute minimum, have just one absolute extremum, or 

have no absolute maximum or absolute minimum. 
• If a function has a local extremum, the point at which it occurs must be a critical point. However, a function need not 

have a local extremum at a critical point. 
• A continuous function over a closed, bounded interval has an absolute maximum and an absolute minimum. Each 

extremum occurs at a critical point or an endpoint. 

4.4 The Mean Value Theorem 
• If  is continuous over  and differentiable over  and  then there exists a point  such 

that  This is Rolle’s theorem. 

Access for free at openstax.org



4 • Chapter Review     433

• If  is continuous over  and differentiable over  then there exists a point  such that 

This is the Mean Value Theorem. 
• If  over an interval  then  is constant over 
• If two differentiable functions  and  satisfy  over  then  for some constant 
• If  over an interval  then  is increasing over  If  over  then  is decreasing over 

4.5 Derivatives and the Shape of a Graph 
• If  is a critical point of  and  for  and  for  then  has a local maximum at 
• If  is a critical point of  and  for  and  for  then  has a local minimum at 
• If  over an interval  then  is concave up over 
• If  over an interval  then  is concave down over 
• If  and  then  has a local minimum at 
• If  and  then  has a local maximum at 
• If  and  then evaluate  at a test point  to the left of  and a test point  to the right of 

to determine whether  has a local extremum at 

4.6 Limits at Infinity and Asymptotes 

• The limit of  is  as ∞  (or as ∞  if the values  become arbitrarily close to  as  becomes 
sufficiently large. 

• The limit of  is ∞  as ∞  if  becomes arbitrarily large as  becomes sufficiently large. The limit of  is 
∞  as ∞  if  and  becomes arbitrarily large as  becomes sufficiently large. We can define the 

limit of  as  approaches ∞  similarly. 
• For a polynomial function  where  the end behavior is determined 

by the leading term  If   approaches ∞  or ∞  at each end. 
• For a rational function  the end behavior is determined by the relationship between the degree of 

and the degree of  If the degree of  is less than the degree of  the line  is a horizontal asymptote for  If 
the degree of  is equal to the degree of  then the line  is a horizontal asymptote, where  and  are the 
leading coefficients of  and  respectively. If the degree of  is greater than the degree of  then  approaches ∞
or ∞  at each end. 

4.7 Applied Optimization Problems 
• To solve an optimization problem, begin by drawing a picture and introducing variables. 
• Find an equation relating the variables. 
• Find a function of one variable to describe the quantity that is to be minimized or maximized. 
• Look for critical points to locate local extrema. 

4.8 L’Hôpital’s Rule 

• L’Hôpital’s rule can be used to evaluate the limit of a quotient when the indeterminate form  or ∞ ∞  arises. 
• L’Hôpital’s rule can also be applied to other indeterminate forms if they can be rewritten in terms of a limit involving 

a quotient that has the indeterminate form  or ∞ ∞
• The exponential function  grows faster than any power function  
• The logarithmic function  grows more slowly than any power function  

4.9 Newton’s Method 
• Newton’s method approximates roots of  by starting with an initial approximation  then uses tangent 

lines to the graph of  to create a sequence of approximations 
• Typically, Newton’s method is an efficient method for finding a particular root. In certain cases, Newton’s method 

fails to work because the list of numbers  does not approach a finite value or it approaches a value 
other than the root sought. 



434     4 • Chapter Review

• Any process in which a list of numbers  is generated by defining an initial number  and defining the 
subsequent numbers by the equation  for some function  is an iterative process. Newton’s method 
is an example of an iterative process, where the function  for a given function 

4.10 Antiderivatives 
• If  is an antiderivative of  then every antiderivative of  is of the form  for some constant 
• Solving the initial-value problem 

requires us first to find the set of antiderivatives of  and then to look for the particular antiderivative that also 
satisfies the initial condition. 

Review Exercises 
True or False? Justify your answer with a proof or a counterexample. Assume that  is continuous and differentiable 
unless stated otherwise. 
525. If  and  526 . If  there is a  527 . There is a function such 

 then there maximum or minimum at that 
exists at least one point and  (A 

 such that graphical “proof” is 
acceptable for this 
answer.) 

528. There is a function such  529 . Given the graph of  determine  530 . The graph of  is given below. Draw 
that there is both an where  is increasing or decreasing. 
inflection point and a 
critical point for some 
value 

531. Find the linear  532 . Find the differential of 
approximation  to  and 

 near evaluate for  with 

Find the critical points and the local and absolute extrema of the following functions on the given interval. 

533.  over  534 . 
over 

Determine over which intervals the following functions are increasing, decreasing, concave up, and concave down. 

535.  536 .  537 . 

538. 

Evaluate the following limits. 

539.  540 .  541 . 
∞ ∞

Access for free at openstax.org



4 • Chapter Review     435

542. 
∞

Use Newton’s method to find the first two iterations, given the starting point. 

543.  544 . 

Find the antiderivatives  of the following functions. 

545.  546 . 

Graph the following functions by hand. Make sure to label the inflection points, critical points, zeros, and asymptotes. 

547.  548 .  549 . A car is being compacted 
into a rectangular solid. 
The volume is decreasing 
at a rate of  m3/sec. The 
length and width of the 
compactor are square, 
but the height is not the 
same length as the length 
and width. If the length 
and width walls move 
toward each other at a 
rate of  m/sec, find 
the rate at which the 
height is changing when 
the length and width are 

 m and the height is 
m. 

550. A rocket is launched into  551 . The famous Regiomontanus’ proble5m5 2 . An airline sells tickets 
space; its kinetic energy is for angle maximization was proposed from Tokyo to Detroit for 
given by during the 15th century. A painting  There are 

hangs on a wall with the bottom of seats available and a 
where  is the kinetic the painting a distance  feet above typical flight books 
energy in joules,  is the eye level, and the top  feet above seats. For every 
mass of the rocket in eye level. What distance  (in feet) decrease in price, the 
kilograms, and  is the from the wall should the viewer stand airline observes an 
velocity of the rocket in to maximize the angle subtended by additional five seats sold. 
meters/second. Assume the painting, What should the fare be 
the velocity is increasing to maximize profit? How 
at a rate of  m/sec2 and many passengers would 
the mass is decreasing at be onboard? 
a rate of  kg/sec 
because the fuel is being 
burned. At what rate is 
the rocket’s kinetic energy 
changing when the mass 
is  kg and the 
velocity is  m/sec? 
Give your answer in 
mega-Joules per second 
(MJ/s), which is equivalent 
to  J/s. 



436     4 • Chapter Review

Access for free at openstax.org



5 • Introduction          437

5 INTEGRATION 

Figure 5.1 Iceboating is a popular winter sport in parts of the northern United States and Europe. (credit: modification of 
work by Carter Brown, Flickr) 

Chapter Outline 
5.1 Approximating Areas 
5.2 The Definite Integral 
5.3 The Fundamental Theorem of Calculus 
5.4 Integration Formulas and the Net Change Theorem 
5.5 Substitution 
5.6 Integrals Involving Exponential and Logarithmic Functions 
5.7 Integrals Resulting in Inverse Trigonometric Functions 

Introduction 
Iceboats are a common sight on the lakes of Wisconsin and Minnesota on winter weekends. Iceboats are similar to 
sailboats, but they are fitted with runners, or “skates,” and are designed to run over the ice, rather than on water. 
Iceboats can move very quickly, and many ice boating enthusiasts are drawn to the sport because of the speed. Top 
iceboat racers can attain speeds up to five times the wind speed. If we know how fast an iceboat is moving, we can use 
integration to determine how far it travels. We revisit this question later in the chapter (see Example 5.27). 
Determining distance from velocity is just one of many applications of integration. In fact, integrals are used in a wide 
variety of mechanical and physical applications. In this chapter, we first introduce the theory behind integration and use 



438     5 • Integration

integrals to calculate areas. From there, we develop the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus, which relates differentiation 
and integration. We then study some basic integration techniques and briefly examine some applications. 

5.1 Approximating Areas 
Learning Objectives 

5.1.1 Use sigma (summation) notation to calculate sums and powers of integers. 
5.1.2 Use the sum of rectangular areas to approximate the area under a curve. 
5.1.3 Use Riemann sums to approximate area. 

Archimedes was fascinated with calculating the areas of various shapes—in other words, the amount of space enclosed 
by the shape. He used a process that has come to be known as the method of exhaustion, which used smaller and 
smaller shapes, the areas of which could be calculated exactly, to fill an irregular region and thereby obtain closer and 
closer approximations to the total area. In this process, an area bounded by curves is filled with rectangles, triangles, 
and shapes with exact area formulas. These areas are then summed to approximate the area of the curved region. 
In this section, we develop techniques to approximate the area between a curve, defined by a function  and the 
x-axis on a closed interval  Like Archimedes, we first approximate the area under the curve using shapes of known 
area (namely, rectangles). By using smaller and smaller rectangles, we get closer and closer approximations to the area. 
Taking a limit allows us to calculate the exact area under the curve. 
Let’s start by introducing some notation to make the calculations easier. We then consider the case when  is 
continuous and nonnegative. Later in the chapter, we relax some of these restrictions and develop techniques that apply 
in more general cases. 

Sigma (Summation) Notation 
As mentioned, we will use shapes of known area to approximate the area of an irregular region bounded by curves. This 
process often requires adding up long strings of numbers. To make it easier to write down these lengthy sums, we look 
at some new notation here, called sigma notation (also known as summation notation). The Greek capital letter 
sigma, is used to express long sums of values in a compact form. For example, if we want to add all the integers from 1 
to 20 without sigma notation, we have to write 

We could probably skip writing a couple of terms and write 

which is better, but still cumbersome. With sigma notation, we write this sum as 

which is much more compact. 
Typically, sigma notation is presented in the form 

where  describes the terms to be added, and the i is called the index. Each term is evaluated, then we sum all the 
values, beginning with the value when  and ending with the value when  For example, an expression like 

 is interpreted as  Note that the index is used only to keep track of the terms to be 

added; it does not factor into the calculation of the sum itself. The index is therefore called a dummy variable. We can 
use any letter we like for the index. Typically, mathematicians use i, j, k, m, and n for indices. 
Let’s try a couple of examples of using sigma notation. 

EXAMPLE 5.1 

Using Sigma Notation 
a. Write in sigma notation and evaluate the sum of terms  for 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.1 • Approximating Areas     439

b. Write the sum in sigma notation: 

Solution 
a. Write 

b. The denominator of each term is a perfect square. Using sigma notation, this sum can be written as 

 5.1 Write in sigma notation and evaluate the sum of terms 2i for 

The properties associated with the summation process are given in the following rule. 

Rule: Properties of Sigma Notation 

Let  and  represent two sequences of terms and let c be a constant. The following properties 
hold for all positive integers n and for integers m, with 

1. 

(5.1) 

2. 

(5.2) 

3. 

(5.3) 

4. 

(5.4) 

5. 

(5.5) 

Proof 
We prove properties 2. and 3. here, and leave proof of the other properties to the Exercises. 
2. We have 



440     5 • Integration

3. We have 

□ 
A few more formulas for frequently found functions simplify the summation process further. These are shown in the next 
rule, for sums and powers of integers, and we use them in the next set of examples. 

Rule: Sums and Powers of Integers 

1. The sum of n integers is given by 

2. The sum of consecutive integers squared is given by 

3. The sum of consecutive integers cubed is given by 

EXAMPLE 5.2 

Evaluation Using Sigma Notation 
Write using sigma notation and evaluate: 

a. The sum of the terms  for 
b. The sum of the terms  for 

Solution 
a. Multiplying out  we can break the expression into three terms. 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.1 • Approximating Areas     441

b. Use sigma notation property iv. and the rules for the sum of squared terms and the sum of cubed terms. 

 5.2 Find the sum of the values of  for 

EXAMPLE 5.3 

Finding the Sum of the Function Values 
Find the sum of the values of  over the integers 

Solution 
Using the formula, we have 

 5.3 Evaluate the sum indicated by the notation 

Approximating Area 
Now that we have the necessary notation, we return to the problem at hand: approximating the area under a curve. Let 

 be a continuous, nonnegative function defined on the closed interval  We want to approximate the area A 
bounded by  above, the x-axis below, the line  on the left, and the line  on the right (Figure 5.2). 



442     5 • Integration

Figure 5.2 An area (shaded region) bounded by the curve  at top, the x-axis at bottom, the line  to the left, and 
the line  at right. 
How do we approximate the area under this curve? The approach is a geometric one. By dividing a region into many 
small shapes that have known area formulas, we can sum these areas and obtain a reasonable estimate of the true area. 
We begin by dividing the interval  into n subintervals of equal width,  We do this by selecting equally spaced 
points  with  and 

for 

We denote the width of each subinterval with the notation Δx, so  and 

for  This notion of dividing an interval  into subintervals by selecting points from within the interval 
is used quite often in approximating the area under a curve, so let’s define some relevant terminology. 

Definition 

A set of points  for  with  which divides the interval 
into subintervals of the form  is called a partition of  If the subintervals all 
have the same width, the set of points forms a regular partition of the interval 

We can use this regular partition as the basis of a method for estimating the area under the curve. We next examine two 
methods: the left-endpoint approximation and the right-endpoint approximation. 

Rule: Left-Endpoint Approximation 

On each subinterval  (for  construct a rectangle with width Δx and height equal to 
which is the function value at the left endpoint of the subinterval. Then the area of this rectangle is 
Adding the areas of all these rectangles, we get an approximate value for A (Figure 5.3). We use the notation Ln to 
denote that this is a left-endpoint approximation of A using n subintervals. 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.1 • Approximating Areas     443

(5.6) 

Figure 5.3 In the left-endpoint approximation of area under a curve, the height of each rectangle is determined by the 
function value at the left of each subinterval. 
The second method for approximating area under a curve is the right-endpoint approximation. It is almost the same as 
the left-endpoint approximation, but now the heights of the rectangles are determined by the function values at the 
right of each subinterval. 

Rule: Right-Endpoint Approximation 

Construct a rectangle on each subinterval  only this time the height of the rectangle is determined by the 
function value  at the right endpoint of the subinterval. Then, the area of each rectangle is  and the 
approximation for A is given by 

(5.7) 

The notation  indicates this is a right-endpoint approximation for A (Figure 5.4). 

Figure 5.4 In the right-endpoint approximation of area under a curve, the height of each rectangle is determined by the 
function value at the right of each subinterval. Note that the right-endpoint approximation differs from the left-endpoint 
approximation in Figure 5.3. 

The graphs in Figure 5.5 represent the curve  In graph (a) we divide the region represented by the interval 



444     5 • Integration

 into six subintervals, each of width 0.5. Thus,  We then form six rectangles by drawing vertical lines 
perpendicular to  the left endpoint of each subinterval. We determine the height of each rectangle by calculating 

 for  The intervals are  We find the area of 
each rectangle by multiplying the height by the width. Then, the sum of the rectangular areas approximates the area 
between  and the x-axis. When the left endpoints are used to calculate height, we have a left-endpoint 
approximation. Thus, 

Figure 5.5 Methods of approximating the area under a curve by using (a) the left endpoints and (b) the right endpoints. 
In Figure 5.5(b), we draw vertical lines perpendicular to  such that  is the right endpoint of each subinterval, and 
calculate  for  We multiply each  by Δx to find the rectangular areas, and then add them. This 
is a right-endpoint approximation of the area under  Thus, 

EXAMPLE 5.4 

Approximating the Area Under a Curve 
Use both left-endpoint and right-endpoint approximations to approximate the area under the curve of  on the 
interval  use 

Solution 
First, divide the interval  into n equal subintervals. Using  This is the width of each 
rectangle. The intervals  are shown in Figure 5.6. Using a left-endpoint approximation, 
the heights are  Then, 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.1 • Approximating Areas     445

Figure 5.6 The graph shows the left-endpoint approximation of the area under  from 0 to 2. 
The right-endpoint approximation is shown in Figure 5.7. The intervals are the same,  but now use the right 
endpoint to calculate the height of the rectangles. We have 

Figure 5.7 The graph shows the right-endpoint approximation of the area under  from 0 to 2. 
The left-endpoint approximation is 1.75; the right-endpoint approximation is 3.75. 

 5.4 Sketch left-endpoint and right-endpoint approximations for  on  use  Approximate 
the area using both methods. 

Looking at Figure 5.5 and the graphs in Example 5.4, we can see that when we use a small number of intervals, neither 
the left-endpoint approximation nor the right-endpoint approximation is a particularly accurate estimate of the area 
under the curve. However, it seems logical that if we increase the number of points in our partition, our estimate of A will 
improve. We will have more rectangles, but each rectangle will be thinner, so we will be able to fit the rectangles to the 
curve more precisely. 
We can demonstrate the improved approximation obtained through smaller intervals with an example. Let’s explore the 
idea of increasing n, first in a left-endpoint approximation with four rectangles, then eight rectangles, and finally 32 
rectangles. Then, let’s do the same thing in a right-endpoint approximation, using the same sets of intervals, of the same 
curved region. Figure 5.8 shows the area of the region under the curve  on the interval  using a 
left-endpoint approximation where  The width of each rectangle is 

The area is approximated by the summed areas of the rectangles, or 



446     5 • Integration

Figure 5.8 With a left-endpoint approximation and dividing the region from a to b into four equal intervals, the area 
under the curve is approximately equal to the sum of the areas of the rectangles. 
Figure 5.9 shows the same curve divided into eight subintervals. Comparing the graph with four rectangles in Figure 5.8 
with this graph with eight rectangles, we can see there appears to be less white space under the curve when  This 
white space is area under the curve we are unable to include using our approximation. The area of the rectangles is 

Figure 5.9 The region under the curve is divided into  rectangular areas of equal width for a left-endpoint 
approximation. 
The graph in Figure 5.10 shows the same function with 32 rectangles inscribed under the curve. There appears to be 
little white space left. The area occupied by the rectangles is 

Figure 5.10 Here, 32 rectangles are inscribed under the curve for a left-endpoint approximation. 
We can carry out a similar process for the right-endpoint approximation method. A right-endpoint approximation of the 
same curve, using four rectangles (Figure 5.11), yields an area 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.1 • Approximating Areas     447

Figure 5.11 Now we divide the area under the curve into four equal subintervals for a right-endpoint approximation. 

Dividing the region over the interval  into eight rectangles results in  The graph is shown in 
Figure 5.12. The area is 

Figure 5.12 Here we use right-endpoint approximation for a region divided into eight equal subintervals. 
Last, the right-endpoint approximation with  is close to the actual area (Figure 5.13). The area is approximately 

Figure 5.13 The region is divided into 32 equal subintervals for a right-endpoint approximation. 
Based on these figures and calculations, it appears we are on the right track; the rectangles appear to approximate the 
area under the curve better as n gets larger. Furthermore, as n increases, both the left-endpoint and right-endpoint 
approximations appear to approach an area of 8 square units. Table 5.1 shows a numerical comparison of the left- and 
right-endpoint methods. The idea that the approximations of the area under the curve get better and better as n gets 
larger and larger is very important, and we now explore this idea in more detail. 



448     5 • Integration

Values of n Approximate Area Ln Approximate Area Rn 

7.5 8.5 

7.75 8.25 

7.94 8.06 

Table 5.1 Converging Values of Left- and Right-Endpoint 
Approximations as n Increases 

Forming Riemann Sums 
So far we have been using rectangles to approximate the area under a curve. The heights of these rectangles have been 
determined by evaluating the function at either the right or left endpoints of the subinterval  In reality, there 
is no reason to restrict evaluation of the function to one of these two points only. We could evaluate the function at any 
point  in the subinterval  and use  as the height of our rectangle. This gives us an estimate for the 
area of the form 

A sum of this form is called a Riemann sum, named for the 19th-century mathematician Bernhard Riemann, who 
developed the idea. 

Definition 

Let  be defined on a closed interval  and let P be a regular partition of  Let Δx be the width of each 
subinterval  and for each i, let  be any point in  A Riemann sum is defined for  as 

Recall that with the left- and right-endpoint approximations, the estimates seem to get better and better as n get larger 
and larger. The same thing happens with Riemann sums. Riemann sums give better approximations for larger values of 
n. We are now ready to define the area under a curve in terms of Riemann sums. 

Definition 

Let  be a continuous, nonnegative function on an interval  and let  be a Riemann sum for 

 Then, the area under the curve  on  is given by 

∞

 MEDIA 

See a graphical demonstration (http://www.openstax.org/l/20_riemannsums) of the construction of a Riemann sum. 

Some subtleties here are worth discussing. First, note that taking the limit of a sum is a little different from taking the 
limit of a function  as x goes to infinity. Limits of sums are discussed in detail in the chapter on Sequences and 
Series (http://openstax.org/books/calculus-volume-2/pages/5-introduction); however, for now we can assume that the 
computational techniques we used to compute limits of functions can also be used to calculate limits of sums. 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.1 • Approximating Areas     449

Second, we must consider what to do if the expression converges to different limits for different choices of 
Fortunately, this does not happen. Although the proof is beyond the scope of this text, it can be shown that if  is 

continuous on the closed interval  then  exists and is unique (in other words, it does not depend 
∞

on the choice of 

We look at some examples shortly. But, before we do, let’s take a moment and talk about some specific choices for 
 Although any choice for  gives us an estimate of the area under the curve, we don’t necessarily know 

whether that estimate is too high (overestimate) or too low (underestimate). If it is important to know whether our 
estimate is high or low, we can select our value for  to guarantee one result or the other. 

If we want an overestimate, for example, we can choose  such that for  for all 
 In other words, we choose  so that for  is the maximum function value on 

the interval  If we select  in this way, then the Riemann sum  is called an upper sum. 

Similarly, if we want an underestimate, we can choose  so that for  is the minimum function 
value on the interval  In this case, the associated Riemann sum is called a lower sum. Note that if  is 
either increasing or decreasing throughout the interval  then the maximum and minimum values of the function 
occur at the endpoints of the subintervals, so the upper and lower sums are just the same as the left- and right-endpoint 
approximations. 

EXAMPLE 5.5 

Finding Lower and Upper Sums 
Find a lower sum for  on  let  subintervals. 

Solution 
With  over the interval  We can list the intervals as 
Because the function is decreasing over the interval  Figure 5.14 shows that a lower sum is obtained by using the 
right endpoints. 

Figure 5.14 The graph of  is set up for a right-endpoint approximation of the area bounded by the curve 
and the x-axis on  and it shows a lower sum. 
The Riemann sum is 

The area of 7.28 is a lower sum and an underestimate. 

 5.5 a. Find an upper sum for  on  let 
b. Sketch the approximation. 



450     5 • Integration

EXAMPLE 5.6 

Finding Lower and Upper Sums for 
Find a lower sum for  over the interval  let 

Solution 
Let’s first look at the graph in Figure 5.15 to get a better idea of the area of interest. 

Figure 5.15 The graph of  is divided into six regions: 

The intervals are  and  Note that  is increasing on the 
interval  so a left-endpoint approximation gives us the lower sum. A left-endpoint approximation is the Riemann 

sum  We have 

 5.6 Using the function  over the interval  find an upper sum; let 

 SECTION 5.1 EXERCISES 
1 . State whether the given 

sums are equal or unequal. 

a.  and 

b.  and 

c.  and 

d.  and 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.1 • Approximating Areas     451

In the following exercises, use the rules for sums of powers of integers to compute the sums. 

2 .  3 . 

Suppose that  and  In the following exercises, compute the sums. 

4 .  5 .  6 . 

7 . 

In the following exercises, use summation properties and formulas to rewrite and evaluate the sums. 

8 .  9 .  10 . 

11 . 

Let  denote the left-endpoint sum using n subintervals and let  denote the corresponding right-endpoint sum. In 
the following exercises, compute the indicated left and right sums for the given functions on the indicated interval. 

12 . L4 for  on  13 . R4 for  on  14 . L6 for  on 

15 . R6 for  on  16 . R4 for  on  17 . L4 for  on 

18 . R8 for  on  19 . L8 for  on  20 . Compute the left and right 
Riemann sums—L4 and R4, 
respectively—for 

 on 
 Compute their 

average value and 
compare it with the area 
under the graph of f. 

21 . Compute the left and right  22 . Compute the left and right  23 . Compute the left and right 
Riemann sums—L6 and R6, Riemann sums—L4 and R4, Riemann sums—L6 and R6, 
respectively—for respectively—for respectively—for 

 on  on  on 
 Compute their and compare their values.  and compare their 

average value and values. 
compare it with the area 
under the graph of f. 

Express the following endpoint sums in sigma notation but do not evaluate them. 

24 . L30 for  on  25 . L10 for  on  26 . R20 for  on 

27 . R100 for  on 



452     5 • Integration

In the following exercises, graph the function then use a calculator or a computer program to evaluate the following left 
and right endpoint sums. If the two agree, say "neither." 
28 . [T] L100 and R100 for  29 . [T] L100 and R100 for  30 . [T] L50 and R50 for 

 on the  on the interval  on the interval 
interval 

31 . [T] L100 and R100 for  32 . [T] L50 and R50 for  33 . [T] L100 and R100 for 
 on the interval  on the interval  on the interval 

34 . Let tj denote the time that  35 . Let  denote the total  36 . Let  denote the hours of 
it took Tejay van Garteren rainfall in Portland on the daylight and  denote the 
to ride the jth stage of the jth day of the year in 2009. increase in the hours of 
Tour de France in 2014. If daylight from day  to 
there were a total of 21 Interpret day j in Fargo, North 

Dakota, on the jth day of 
stages, interpret the year. Interpret 

37 . To help get in shape, Joe  38 . The following table gives  39 . The following table gives 
gets a new pair of running approximate values of the the approximate increase 
shoes. If Joe runs 1 mi each average annual in sea level in inches over 
day in week 1 and adds atmospheric rate of 20 years starting in the 
mi to his daily routine each increase in carbon dioxide given year. Estimate the 
week, what is the total (CO2) each decade since net change in mean sea 
mileage on Joe’s shoes 1960, in parts per million level from 1870 to 2010. 
after 25 weeks? (ppm). Estimate the total 

increase in atmospheric Starting 20-Year 
CO2 between 1964 and Year Change 
2013. 

1870 0.3 
Decade Ppm/y 

1890 1.5 
1964–1973 1.07 

1910 0.2 
1974–1983 1.34 

1930 2.8 
1984–1993 1.40 

1950 0.7 
1994–2003 1.87 

1970 1.1 
2004–2013 2.07 

1990 1.5 
Table 5.2 Average 
Annual Atmospheric Table 5.3 Approximate 
CO2 Increase, 20-Year Sea Level 
1964–2013 Source: Increases, 1870–1990 
http://www.esrl.noaa.g Source: 
ov/gmd/ccgg/trends/. http://link.springer.com/

article/
10.1007%2Fs10712-011-9119
-1 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.1 • Approximating Areas     453

40 . The following table gives  41 . The following table gives 
the approximate increase the percent growth of the 
in dollars in the average U.S. population beginning 
price of a gallon of gas per in July of the year 
decade since 1950. If the indicated. If the U.S. 
average price of a gallon of population was 
gas in 2010 was $2.60, 281,421,906 in July 2000, 
what was the average price estimate the U.S. 
of a gallon of gas in 1950? population in July 2010. 

Starting 10-Year Year % Change/Year 
Year Change 

2000 1.12 
1950 0.03 

2001 0.99 
1960 0.05 

2002 0.93 
1970 0.86 

2003 0.86 
1980 −0.03 

2004 0.93 
1990 0.29 

2005 0.93 
2000 1.12 

2006 0.97 
Table 5.4 Approximate 
10-Year Gas Price 2007 0.96 
Increases, 1950–2000 
Source: http://epb.lbl.gov/ 2008 0.95 
homepages/Rick_Diamond/
docs/lbnl55011-trends.pdf. 2009 0.88 

Table 5.5 Annual 
Percentage Growth of 
U.S. Population, 
2000–2009 Source: 
http://www.census.gov/
popest/data. 

(Hint: To obtain the 
population in July 2001, 
multiply the population in 
July 2000 by 1.0112 to get 
284,573,831.) 



454     5 • Integration

In the following exercises, estimate the areas under the curves by computing the left Riemann sums, L8. 
42 .  43 .  44 . 

45 .  46 . [T] Use a computer algebra  47 . [T] Use a computer algebra 
system to compute the system to compute the 
Riemann sum,  for Riemann sum, LN, for 

 for  for 
 on  on 

48 . [T] Use a computer algebra 
system to compute the 
Riemann sum, LN, for 

 for 
 on 

Compare these estimates 
with π. 

In the following exercises, use a calculator or a computer program to evaluate the endpoint sums RN and LN for 
 How do these estimates compare with the exact answers, which you can find via geometry? 

49 . [T]  on the  50 . [T]  on the 
interval interval 

In the following exercises, use a calculator or a computer program to evaluate the endpoint sums RN and LN for 

51 . [T]  on  52 . [T]  on the interval  53 . Explain why, if 
the interval  which  which has an exact and f is increasing on 
has an exact area of area of  that the left 

endpoint estimate is a 
lower bound for the area 
below the graph of f on 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.1 • Approximating Areas     455

54 . Explain why, if  55 . Show that, in general,  56 . Explain why, if f is 
and f is decreasing on increasing on  the 

 that the left error between either LN or 
endpoint estimate is an RN and the area A below 
upper bound for the area the graph of f is at most 
below the graph of f on 

57 . For each of the three graphs:  58 . In the previous exercise,  59 . A unit circle is made up of n 
a. Obtain a lower bound  for explain why  gets no wedges equivalent to the inner 

the area enclosed by the curve by smaller while  gets wedge in the figure. The base 
adding the areas of the squares no larger as the squares of the inner triangle is 1 unit 
enclosed completely by the are subdivided into four and its height is  The 
curve. boxes of equal area. base of the outer triangle is 

b. Obtain an upper bound  for 
the area by adding to  the and the height is 
areas  of the squares  Use this 
enclosed partially by the curve. information to argue that the 

area of a unit circle is equal to 
π. 



456     5 • Integration

5.2 The Definite Integral 
Learning Objectives 

5.2.1 State the definition of the definite integral. 
5.2.2 Explain the terms integrand, limits of integration, and variable of integration. 
5.2.3 Explain when a function is integrable. 
5.2.4 Describe the relationship between the definite integral and net area. 
5.2.5 Use geometry and the properties of definite integrals to evaluate them. 
5.2.6 Calculate the average value of a function. 

In the preceding section we defined the area under a curve in terms of Riemann sums: 

∞

However, this definition came with restrictions. We required  to be continuous and nonnegative. Unfortunately, real-
world problems don’t always meet these restrictions. In this section, we look at how to apply the concept of the area 
under the curve to a broader set of functions through the use of the definite integral. 

Definition and Notation 
The definite integral generalizes the concept of the area under a curve. We lift the requirements that  be continuous 
and nonnegative, and define the definite integral as follows. 

Definition 

If  is a function defined on an interval  the definite integral of f from a to b is given by 

(5.8) 
∞

provided the limit exists. If this limit exists, the function  is said to be integrable on  or is an integrable 
function. 

The integral symbol in the previous definition should look familiar. We have seen similar notation in the chapter on 
Applications of Derivatives, where we used the indefinite integral symbol (without the a and b above and below) to 
represent an antiderivative. Although the notation for indefinite integrals may look similar to the notation for a definite 
integral, they are not the same. A definite integral is a number. An indefinite integral is a family of functions. Later in this 
chapter we examine how these concepts are related. However, close attention should always be paid to notation so we 
know whether we’re working with a definite integral or an indefinite integral. 
Integral notation goes back to the late seventeenth century and is one of the contributions of Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz, 
who is often considered to be the codiscoverer of calculus, along with Isaac Newton. The integration symbol ∫ is an 
elongated S, suggesting sigma or summation. On a definite integral, above and below the summation symbol are the 
boundaries of the interval,  The numbers a and b are x-values and are called the limits of integration; specifically, 
a is the lower limit and b is the upper limit. To clarify, we are using the word limit in two different ways in the context of 
the definite integral. First, we talk about the limit of a sum as ∞  Second, the boundaries of the region are called the 
limits of integration. 
We call the function  the integrand, and the dx indicates that  is a function with respect to x, called the 
variable of integration. Note that, like the index in a sum, the variable of integration is a dummy variable, and has no 
impact on the computation of the integral. We could use any variable we like as the variable of integration: 

Previously, we discussed the fact that if  is continuous on  then the limit  exists and is 
∞

unique. This leads to the following theorem, which we state without proof. 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.2 • The Definite Integral     457

Theorem 5.1 

Continuous Functions Are Integrable 
If  is continuous on  then f is integrable on 

Functions that are not continuous on  may still be integrable, depending on the nature of the discontinuities. For 
example, functions continuous on a closed interval, apart from a finite number of jump discontinuities, are integrable. 
It is also worth noting here that we have retained the use of a regular partition in the Riemann sums. This restriction is 
not strictly necessary. Any partition can be used to form a Riemann sum. However, if a nonregular partition is used to 
define the definite integral, it is not sufficient to take the limit as the number of subintervals goes to infinity. Instead, we 
must take the limit as the width of the largest subinterval goes to zero. This introduces a little more complex notation in 
our limits and makes the calculations more difficult without really gaining much additional insight, so we stick with 
regular partitions for the Riemann sums. 

EXAMPLE 5.7 

Evaluating an Integral Using the Definition 

Use the definition of the definite integral to evaluate  Use a right-endpoint approximation to generate the 

Riemann sum. 

Solution 
We first want to set up a Riemann sum. Based on the limits of integration, we have  and  For 
let  be a regular partition of  Then 

Since we are using a right-endpoint approximation to generate Riemann sums, for each i, we need to calculate the 
function value at the right endpoint of the interval  The right endpoint of the interval is  and since P is a 
regular partition, 

Thus, the function value at the right endpoint of the interval is 

Then the Riemann sum takes the form 

Using the summation formula for  we have 



458     5 • Integration

Now, to calculate the definite integral, we need to take the limit as ∞  We get 

∞

∞

∞ ∞ ∞

 5.7 Use the definition of the definite integral to evaluate  Use a right-endpoint approximation 

to generate the Riemann sum. 

Evaluating Definite Integrals 
Evaluating definite integrals this way can be quite tedious because of the complexity of the calculations. Later in this 
chapter we develop techniques for evaluating definite integrals without taking limits of Riemann sums. However, for 
now, we can rely on the fact that definite integrals represent the area under the curve, and we can evaluate definite 
integrals by using geometric formulas to calculate that area. We do this to confirm that definite integrals do, indeed, 
represent areas, so we can then discuss what to do in the case of a curve of a function dropping below the x-axis. 

EXAMPLE 5.8 

Using Geometric Formulas to Calculate Definite Integrals 

Use the formula for the area of a circle to evaluate 

Solution 
The function describes a semicircle with radius 3. To find 

we want to find the area under the curve over the interval  The formula for the area of a circle is  The area 
of a semicircle is just one-half the area of a circle, or  The shaded area in Figure 5.16 covers one-half of the 
semicircle, or  Thus, 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.2 • The Definite Integral     459

Figure 5.16 The value of the integral of the function  over the interval  is the area of the shaded region. 

 5.8 Use the formula for the area of a trapezoid to evaluate 

Area and the Definite Integral 
When we defined the definite integral, we lifted the requirement that  be nonnegative. But how do we interpret “the 
area under the curve” when  is negative? 

Net Signed Area 
Let us return to the Riemann sum. Consider, for example, the function  (shown in Figure 5.17) on the 
interval  Use  and choose  as the left endpoint of each interval. Construct a rectangle on each 
subinterval of height  and width Δx. When  is positive, the product  represents the area of the 
rectangle, as before. When  is negative, however, the product  represents the negative of the area of the 
rectangle. The Riemann sum then becomes 

Figure 5.17 For a function that is partly negative, the Riemann sum is the area of the rectangles above the x-axis less the 
area of the rectangles below the x-axis. 



460     5 • Integration

Taking the limit as ∞  the Riemann sum approaches the area between the curve above the x-axis and the x-axis, less 
the area between the curve below the x-axis and the x-axis, as shown in Figure 5.18. Then, 

∞

The quantity  is called the net signed area. 

Figure 5.18 In the limit, the definite integral equals area A1 less area A2, or the net signed area. 
Notice that net signed area can be positive, negative, or zero. If the area above the x-axis is larger, the net signed area is 
positive. If the area below the x-axis is larger, the net signed area is negative. If the areas above and below the x-axis are 
equal, the net signed area is zero. 

EXAMPLE 5.9 

Finding the Net Signed Area 
Find the net signed area between the curve of the function  and the x-axis over the interval 

Solution 
The function produces a straight line that forms two triangles: one from  to  and the other from  to 

 (Figure 5.19). Using the geometric formula for the area of a triangle,  the area of triangle A1, above the 
axis, is 

where 3 is the base and  is the height. The area of triangle A2, below the axis, is 

where 3 is the base and 6 is the height. Thus, the net area is 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.2 • The Definite Integral     461

Figure 5.19 The area above the curve and below the x-axis equals the area below the curve and above the x-axis. 

Analysis 
If A1 is the area above the x-axis and A2 is the area below the x-axis, then the net area is  Since the areas of the 
two triangles are equal, the net area is zero. 

 5.9 Find the net signed area of  over the interval  illustrated in the following image. 

Total Area 
One application of the definite integral is finding displacement when given a velocity function. If  represents the 
velocity of an object as a function of time, then the area under the curve tells us how far the object is from its original 
position. This is a very important application of the definite integral, and we examine it in more detail later in the chapter. 
For now, we’re just going to look at some basics to get a feel for how this works by studying constant velocities. 
When velocity is a constant, the area under the curve is just velocity times time. This idea is already very familiar. If a car 
travels away from its starting position in a straight line at a speed of 70 mph for 2 hours, then it is 140 mi away from its 
original position (Figure 5.20). Using integral notation, we have 



462     5 • Integration

Figure 5.20 The area under the curve  tells us how far the car is from its starting point at a given time. 
In the context of displacement, net signed area allows us to take direction into account. If a car travels straight north at a 
speed of 60 mph for 2 hours, it is 120 mi north of its starting position. If the car then turns around and travels south at a 
speed of 40 mph for 3 hours, it will be back at it starting position (Figure 5.21). Again, using integral notation, we have 

In this case the displacement is zero. 

Figure 5.21 The area above the axis and the area below the axis are equal, so the net signed area is zero. 
Suppose we want to know how far the car travels overall, regardless of direction. In this case, we want to know the area 
between the curve and the x-axis, regardless of whether that area is above or below the axis. This is called the total 
area. 
Graphically, it is easiest to think of calculating total area by adding the areas above the axis and the areas below the axis 
(rather than subtracting the areas below the axis, as we did with net signed area). To accomplish this mathematically, we 
use the absolute value function. Thus, the total distance traveled by the car is 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.2 • The Definite Integral     463

Bringing these ideas together formally, we state the following definitions. 

Definition 

Let  be an integrable function defined on an interval  Let A1 represent the area between  and the 
x-axis that lies above the axis and let A2 represent the area between  and the x-axis that lies below the axis. Then, 
the net signed area between  and the x-axis is given by 

The total area between  and the x-axis is given by 

EXAMPLE 5.10 

Finding the Total Area 
Find the total area between  and the x-axis over the interval 

Solution 
Calculate the x-intercept as  (set  solve for x). To find the total area, take the area below the x-axis over the 
subinterval  and add it to the area above the x-axis on the subinterval  (Figure 5.22). 

Figure 5.22 The total area between the line and the x-axis over  is A2 plus A1. 
We have 

Then, using the formula for the area of a triangle, we obtain 

The total area, then, is 

 5.10 Find the total area between the function  and the x-axis over the interval 



464     5 • Integration

Properties of the Definite Integral 
The properties of indefinite integrals apply to definite integrals as well. Definite integrals also have properties that relate 
to the limits of integration. These properties, along with the rules of integration that we examine later in this chapter, 
help us manipulate expressions to evaluate definite integrals. 

Rule: Properties of the Definite Integral 

1. 

(5.9) 

If the limits of integration are the same, the integral is just a line and contains no area. 
2. 

(5.10) 

If the limits are reversed, then place a negative sign in front of the integral. 
3. 

(5.11) 

The integral of a sum is the sum of the integrals. 
4. 

(5.12) 

The integral of a difference is the difference of the integrals. 
5. 

(5.13) 

for constant c. The integral of the product of a constant and a function is equal to the constant multiplied by the 
integral of the function. 

6. 

(5.14) 

Although this formula normally applies when c is between a and b, the formula holds for all values of a, b, and c, 
provided  is integrable on the largest interval. 

EXAMPLE 5.11 

Using the Properties of the Definite Integral 
Use the properties of the definite integral to express the definite integral of  over the interval 

 as the sum of three definite integrals. 

Solution 

Using integral notation, we have  We apply properties 3. and 5. to get 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.2 • The Definite Integral     465

 5.11 Use the properties of the definite integral to express the definite integral of 
over the interval  as the sum of four definite integrals. 

EXAMPLE 5.12 

Using the Properties of the Definite Integral 

If it is known that  and  find the value of 

Solution 
By property 6., 

Thus, 

 5.12 If it is known that  and  find the value of 

Comparison Properties of Integrals 
A picture can sometimes tell us more about a function than the results of computations. Comparing functions by their 
graphs as well as by their algebraic expressions can often give new insight into the process of integration. Intuitively, we 
might say that if a function  is above another function  then the area between  and the x-axis is greater 
than the area between  and the x-axis. This is true depending on the interval over which the comparison is made. 
The properties of definite integrals are valid whether  or  The following properties, however, concern 
only the case  and are used when we want to compare the sizes of integrals. 

Theorem 5.2 

Comparison Theorem 
i. If  for  then 

ii. If  for  then 

iii. If m and M are constants such that  for  then 



466     5 • Integration

EXAMPLE 5.13 

Comparing Two Functions over a Given Interval 
Compare  and  over the interval 

Solution 
Graphing these functions is necessary to understand how they compare over the interval  Initially, when graphed 
on a graphing calculator,  appears to be above  everywhere. However, on the interval  the graphs appear 
to be on top of each other. We need to zoom in to see that, on the interval  is above  The two functions 
intersect at  and  (Figure 5.23). 

Figure 5.23 (a) The function  appears above the function  except over the interval  (b) Viewing the same 
graph with a greater zoom shows this more clearly. 
We can see from the graph that over the interval  Comparing the integrals over the specified interval 

 we also see that  (Figure 5.24). The thin, red-shaded area shows just how much 

difference there is between these two integrals over the interval 

Figure 5.24 (a) The graph shows that over the interval  where equality holds only at the endpoints of 
the interval. (b) Viewing the same graph with a greater zoom shows this more clearly. 

Average Value of a Function 
We often need to find the average of a set of numbers, such as an average test grade. Suppose you received the 
following test scores in your algebra class: 89, 90, 56, 78, 100, and 69. Your semester grade is your average of test scores 
and you want to know what grade to expect. We can find the average by adding all the scores and dividing by the 
number of scores. In this case, there are six test scores. Thus, 

Therefore, your average test grade is approximately 80.33, which translates to a B− at most schools. 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.2 • The Definite Integral     467

Suppose, however, that we have a function  that gives us the speed of an object at any time t, and we want to find 
the object’s average speed. The function  takes on an infinite number of values, so we can’t use the process just 
described. Fortunately, we can use a definite integral to find the average value of a function such as this. 
Let  be continuous over the interval  and let  be divided into n subintervals of width 
Choose a representative  in each subinterval and calculate  for  In other words, consider each 

 as a sampling of the function over each subinterval. The average value of the function may then be approximated 
as 

which is basically the same expression used to calculate the average of discrete values. 

But we know  so  and we get 

Following through with the algebra, the numerator is a sum that is represented as  and we are dividing by a 

fraction. To divide by a fraction, invert the denominator and multiply. Thus, an approximate value for the average value 
of the function is given by 

This is a Riemann sum. Then, to get the exact average value, take the limit as n goes to infinity. Thus, the average value 
of a function is given by 

∞

Definition 

Let  be continuous over the interval  Then, the average value of the function  (or fave) on  is 
given by 

EXAMPLE 5.14 

Finding the Average Value of a Linear Function 
Find the average value of  over the interval 

Solution 
First, graph the function on the stated interval, as shown in Figure 5.25. 



468     5 • Integration

Figure 5.25 The graph shows the area under the function  over 

The region is a trapezoid lying on its side, so we can use the area formula for a trapezoid  where h 
represents height, and a and b represent the two parallel sides. Then, 

Thus the average value of the function is 

 5.13 Find the average value of  over the interval 

 SECTION 5.2 EXERCISES 
In the following exercises, express the limits as integrals. 

60 .  over  61 .  62 . 
∞ ∞ ∞

over over 

63 . 
∞

over 

In the following exercises, given Ln or Rn as indicated, express their limits as ∞  as definite integrals, identifying the 
correct intervals. 

64 .  65 .  66 . 

67 .  68 . 

69 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.2 • The Definite Integral     469

In the following exercises, evaluate the integrals of the functions graphed using the formulas for areas of triangles and 
circles, and subtracting the areas below the x-axis. 
70 .  71 .  72 . 

73 .  74 .  75 . 

In the following exercises, evaluate the integral using area formulas. 

76 .  77 .  78 . 

79 .  80 .  81 . 

82 .  83 . 

In the following exercises, use averages of values at the left (L) and right (R) endpoints to compute the integrals of the 
piecewise linear functions with graphs that pass through the given list of points over the indicated intervals. 
84 .  85 . 

over over 
86 .  87 . 

over over 

Suppose that  and  and  and  In the following 

exercises, compute the integrals. 

88 .  89 .  90 . 

91 .  92 .  93 . 



470     5 • Integration

In the following exercises, use the identity  to compute the integrals. 

94 .  95 . 

In the following exercises, find the net signed area between  and the x-axis. 

96 .  (Hint: Look  97 .  (Hint: Look 

at the graph of f.) at the graph of f.) 

In the following exercises, given that  and  compute the integrals. 

98 .  99 .  100 . 

101.  102 .  103 . 

In the following exercises, use the comparison theorem. 
104. Show that  105 . Show that  106 . Show that 

107. Show that  108 . Show that  109 . Show that 

 over 

In the following exercises, find the average value fave of f between a and b, and find a point c, where 

110.  111 .  112 . 
113.  114 .  115 . 

In the following exercises, approximate the average value using Riemann sums L100 and R100. How does your answer 
compare with the exact given answer? 

116. [T]  over the  117 . [T]  over the  118 . [T]  over the 
interval  the exact interval  the exact interval  the exact 
solution is solution is solution is 

119. [T]  over the 

interval  the exact 
solution is 

In the following exercises, compute the average value using the left Riemann sums LN for  How does the 
accuracy compare with the given exact value? 

120. [T]  over the  121 . [T]  over the  122 . [T]  over the 
interval  the exact interval  the exact interval  the exact 
solution is solution is solution is 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.2 • The Definite Integral     471

123. [T]  over the  124 . Suppose that  125 . Suppose that 
interval  the exact  and 
solution is 

 Show and 

that  and Show that 

126. Show that the average  127 . Show that the average  128 . Explain why the graphs of 
value of  over value of  over a quadratic function 
is equal to 1/2 Without is equal to  Without (parabola)  and a 
further calculation, further calculation, linear function  can 
determine whether the determine whether the intersect in at most two 
average value of average value of points. Suppose that 
over  is also equal to over  is also equal to  and 
1/2.  and that 

Explain why 

whenever 
129. Suppose that parabola  130 . Suppose  can be subdivided into  131 . Suppose f and g are 

subintervals continuous functions 
opens downward such that 
and has a vertex of such that either  over 

 For which or  over  Set 
interval  is for every subinterval 

of  Explain why 
a. Explain why  for all values 

as large as possible? of x. 

b. Then, explain why 

132. Suppose the average  133 . Suppose that  can be  134 . Suppose that for each i 
value of f over  is 1 partitioned. taking such that  one 
and the average value of f 
over  is 1 where such that the average value has 

 Show that the of f over each subinterval Show that 
average value of f over  is equal to 1 

 is also 1. for each 
Explain why the average 
value of f over  is also 
equal to 1. 



472     5 • Integration

135. Suppose that for each i such  136 . [T] Compute the left and  137. [T] Compute the left and 
that  one has right Riemann sums L10 right Riemann sums, L10 

and R10 and their average and R10, and their 
 Show that 

 for average  for 
over  Given that  over 

 to how  Given that 

many decimal places is  to 

 accurate? how many decimal places 
is  accurate? 

138. If  139 . Estimate  using  140 . Estimate  by 

the left and right comparison with the area 
endpoint sums, each with of a single rectangle with 

what is a single rectangle. How height equal to the value 
does the average of these of t at the midpoint 
left and right endpoint How does this midpoint 
sums compare with the estimate compare with 
actual value the actual value 

141. From the graph of  shown:  142 . If f is 1-periodic  143 . If f is 1-periodic and 
 odd, 

a. Explain why and integrable over  is it 

b. Explain why, in general,  is it always true necessarily true that 

 for any that  for all 

value of a. A? 

5.3 The Fundamental Theorem of Calculus 
Learning Objectives 

5.3.1 Describe the meaning of the Mean Value Theorem for Integrals. 
5.3.2 State the meaning of the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus, Part 1. 
5.3.3 Use the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus, Part 1, to evaluate derivatives of integrals. 
5.3.4 State the meaning of the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus, Part 2. 
5.3.5 Use the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus, Part 2, to evaluate definite integrals. 
5.3.6 Explain the relationship between differentiation and integration. 

In the previous two sections, we looked at the definite integral and its relationship to the area under the curve of a 
function. Unfortunately, so far, the only tools we have available to calculate the value of a definite integral are geometric 
area formulas and limits of Riemann sums, and both approaches are extremely cumbersome. In this section we look at 
some more powerful and useful techniques for evaluating definite integrals. 
These new techniques rely on the relationship between differentiation and integration. This relationship was discovered 
and explored by both Sir Isaac Newton and Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz (among others) during the late 1600s and early 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.3 • The Fundamental Theorem of Calculus     473

1700s, and it is codified in what we now call the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus, which has two parts that we 
examine in this section. Its very name indicates how central this theorem is to the entire development of calculus. 

 MEDIA 

Isaac Newton’s contributions to mathematics and physics changed the way we look at the world. The relationships 
he discovered, codified as Newton’s laws and the law of universal gravitation, are still taught as foundational 
material in physics today, and his calculus has spawned entire fields of mathematics. To learn more, read a brief 
biography (http://www.openstax.org/l/20_newtonbio) of Newton with multimedia clips. 

Before we get to this crucial theorem, however, let’s examine another important theorem, the Mean Value Theorem for 
Integrals, which is needed to prove the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus. 

The Mean Value Theorem for Integrals 
The Mean Value Theorem for Integrals states that a continuous function on a closed interval takes on its average value 
at some point in that interval. The theorem guarantees that if  is continuous, a point c exists in an interval 
such that the value of the function at c is equal to the average value of  over  We state this theorem 
mathematically with the help of the formula for the average value of a function that we presented at the end of the 
preceding section. 

Theorem 5.3 

The Mean Value Theorem for Integrals 
If  is continuous over an interval  then there is at least one point  such that 

(5.15) 

This formula can also be stated as 

Proof 
Since  is continuous on  by the extreme value theorem (see Maxima and Minima), it assumes minimum and 
maximum values—m and M, respectively—on  Then, for all x in  we have  Therefore, by the 
comparison theorem (see The Definite Integral), we have 

Dividing by  gives us 

Since  is a number between m and M, and since  is continuous and assumes the values m and M 

over  by the Intermediate Value Theorem (see Continuity), there is a number c over  such that 

and the proof is complete. 
□ 



474     5 • Integration

EXAMPLE 5.15 

Finding the Average Value of a Function 
Find the average value of the function  over the interval  and find c such that  equals the average 
value of the function over 

Solution 
The formula states the mean value of  is given by 

We can see in Figure 5.26 that the function represents a straight line and forms a right triangle bounded by the x- and 
y-axes. The area of the triangle is  We have 

The average value is found by multiplying the area by  Thus, the average value of the function is 

Set the average value equal to  and solve for c. 

At 

Figure 5.26 By the Mean Value Theorem, the continuous function  takes on its average value at c at least once over 
a closed interval. 

 5.14 Find the average value of the function  over the interval  and find c such that  equals 
the average value of the function over 

EXAMPLE 5.16 

Finding the Point Where a Function Takes on Its Average Value 

Given  find c such that  equals the average value of  over 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.3 • The Fundamental Theorem of Calculus     475

Solution 
We are looking for the value of c such that 

Replacing  with c2, we have 

Since  is outside the interval, take only the positive value. Thus,  (Figure 5.27). 

Figure 5.27 Over the interval  the function  takes on its average value at 

 5.15 Given  find c such that  equals the average value of  over 

Fundamental Theorem of Calculus Part 1: Integrals and Antiderivatives 
As mentioned earlier, the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus is an extremely powerful theorem that establishes the 
relationship between differentiation and integration, and gives us a way to evaluate definite integrals without using 
Riemann sums or calculating areas. The theorem is comprised of two parts, the first of which, the Fundamental 
Theorem of Calculus, Part 1, is stated here. Part 1 establishes the relationship between differentiation and integration. 

Theorem 5.4 

Fundamental Theorem of Calculus, Part 1 
If  is continuous over an interval  and the function  is defined by 

(5.16) 

then  over 

Before we delve into the proof, a couple of subtleties are worth mentioning here. First, a comment on the notation. Note 



476     5 • Integration

that we have defined a function,  as the definite integral of another function,  from the point a to the point x. 
At first glance, this is confusing, because we have said several times that a definite integral is a number, and here it looks 
like it’s a function. The key here is to notice that for any particular value of x, the definite integral is a number. So the 
function  returns a number (the value of the definite integral) for each value of x. 
Second, it is worth commenting on some of the key implications of this theorem. There is a reason it is called the 
Fundamental Theorem of Calculus. Not only does it establish a relationship between integration and differentiation, but 
also it guarantees that any integrable function has an antiderivative. 

Proof 
Applying the definition of the derivative, we have 

Looking carefully at this last expression, we see  is just the average value of the function  over the 

interval  Therefore, by The Mean Value Theorem for Integrals, there is some number c in  such that 

In addition, since c is between x and x + h, c approaches x as h approaches zero. Also, since  is continuous, we have 
 Putting all these pieces together, we have 

and the proof is complete. 
□ 

EXAMPLE 5.17 

Finding a Derivative with the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus 
Use the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus, Part 1 to find the derivative of 

Solution 
According to the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus, the derivative is given by 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.3 • The Fundamental Theorem of Calculus     477

 5.16 Use the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus, Part 1 to find the derivative of 

EXAMPLE 5.18 

Using the Fundamental Theorem and the Chain Rule to Calculate Derivatives 

Let  Find 

Solution 

Letting  we have  Thus, by the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus and the chain rule, 

 5.17 Let  Find 

EXAMPLE 5.19 

Using the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus with Two Variable Limits of Integration 

Let  Find 

Solution 

We have  Both limits of integration are variable, so we need to split this into two integrals. We get 

Differentiating the first term, we obtain 

Differentiating the second term, we first let  Then, 



478     5 • Integration

Thus, 

 5.18 Let  Find 

Fundamental Theorem of Calculus, Part 2: The Evaluation Theorem 
The Fundamental Theorem of Calculus, Part 2, is perhaps the most important theorem in calculus. After tireless efforts 
by mathematicians for approximately 500 years, new techniques emerged that provided scientists with the necessary 
tools to explain many phenomena. Using calculus, astronomers could finally determine distances in space and map 
planetary orbits. Everyday financial problems such as calculating marginal costs or predicting total profit could now be 
handled with simplicity and accuracy. Engineers could calculate the bending strength of materials or the three-
dimensional motion of objects. Our view of the world was forever changed with calculus. 
After finding approximate areas by adding the areas of n rectangles, the application of this theorem is straightforward by 
comparison. It almost seems too simple that the area of an entire curved region can be calculated by just evaluating an 
antiderivative at the first and last endpoints of an interval. 

Theorem 5.5 

The Fundamental Theorem of Calculus, Part 2 
If f is continuous over the interval  and  is any antiderivative of  then 

(5.17) 

We often see the notation  to denote the expression  We use this vertical bar and associated limits a 
and b to indicate that we should evaluate the function  at the upper limit (in this case, b), and subtract the value of 
the function  evaluated at the lower limit (in this case, a). 
The Fundamental Theorem of Calculus, Part 2 (also known as the evaluation theorem) states that if we can find an 
antiderivative for the integrand, then we can evaluate the definite integral by evaluating the antiderivative at the 
endpoints of the interval and subtracting. 

Proof 
Let  be a regular partition of  Then, we can write 

Now, we know F is an antiderivative of f over  so by the Mean Value Theorem (see The Mean Value Theorem) for 
 we can find  in  such that 

Then, substituting into the previous equation, we have 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.3 • The Fundamental Theorem of Calculus     479

Taking the limit of both sides as ∞  we obtain 

∞

□ 

EXAMPLE 5.20 

Evaluating an Integral with the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus 
Use The Fundamental Theorem of Calculus, Part 2 to evaluate 

Solution 
Recall the power rule for Antiderivatives: 

Use this rule to find the antiderivative of the function and then apply the theorem. We have 

Analysis 
Notice that we did not include the “+ C” term when we wrote the antiderivative. The reason is that, according to the 
Fundamental Theorem of Calculus, Part 2, any antiderivative works. So, for convenience, we chose the antiderivative with 

 If we had chosen another antiderivative, the constant term would have canceled out. This always happens when 
evaluating a definite integral. 
The region of the area we just calculated is depicted in Figure 5.28. Note that the region between the curve and the 
x-axis is all below the x-axis. Area is always positive, but a definite integral can still produce a negative number (a net 
signed area). For example, if this were a profit function, a negative number indicates the company is operating at a loss 
over the given interval. 



480     5 • Integration

Figure 5.28 The evaluation of a definite integral can produce a negative value, even though area is always positive. 

EXAMPLE 5.21 

Evaluating a Definite Integral Using the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus, Part 2 
Evaluate the following integral using the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus, Part 2: 

Solution 
First, eliminate the radical by rewriting the integral using rational exponents. Then, separate the numerator terms by 
writing each one over the denominator: 

Use the properties of exponents to simplify: 

Now, integrate using the power rule: 

See Figure 5.29. 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.3 • The Fundamental Theorem of Calculus     481

Figure 5.29 The area under the curve from  to  can be calculated by evaluating a definite integral. 

 5.19 Use The Fundamental Theorem of Calculus, Part 2 to evaluate 

EXAMPLE 5.22 

A Roller-Skating Race 
James and Kathy are racing on roller skates. They race along a long, straight track, and whoever has gone the farthest 
after 5 sec wins a prize. If James can skate at a velocity of  ft/sec and Kathy can skate at a velocity of 

 ft/sec, who is going to win the race? 

Solution 
We need to integrate both functions over the interval  and see which value is bigger. For James, we want to calculate 

Using the power rule, we have 

Thus, James has skated 50 ft after 5 sec. Turning now to Kathy, we want to calculate 

We know  is an antiderivative of  so it is reasonable to expect that an antiderivative of  would involve 
 However, when we differentiate  we get  as a result of the chain rule, so we have to 

account for this additional coefficient when we integrate. We obtain 

Kathy has skated approximately 50.6 ft after 5 sec. Kathy wins, but not by much! 

 5.20 Suppose James and Kathy have a rematch, but this time the official stops the contest after only 3 sec. Does 
this change the outcome? 



482     5 • Integration

STUDENT PROJECT 

A Parachutist in Free Fall 

Figure 5.30 Skydivers can adjust the velocity of their dive by changing the position of their body during the free fall. 
(credit: Jeremy T. Lock) 

Julie is an avid skydiver. She has more than 300 jumps under her belt and has mastered the art of making 
adjustments to her body position in the air to control how fast she falls. If she arches her back and points her belly 
toward the ground, she reaches a terminal velocity of approximately 120 mph (176 ft/sec). If, instead, she orients her 
body with her head straight down, she falls faster, reaching a terminal velocity of 150 mph (220 ft/sec). 

Since Julie will be moving (falling) in a downward direction, we assume the downward direction is positive to simplify 
our calculations. Julie executes her jumps from an altitude of 12,500 ft. After she exits the aircraft, she immediately 
starts falling at a velocity given by  She continues to accelerate according to this velocity function until she 
reaches terminal velocity. After she reaches terminal velocity, her speed remains constant until she pulls her ripcord 
and slows down to land. 

On her first jump of the day, Julie orients herself in the slower “belly down” position (terminal velocity is 176 ft/sec). 
Using this information, answer the following questions. 

1. How long after she exits the aircraft does Julie reach terminal velocity? 
2. Based on your answer to question 1, set up an expression involving one or more integrals that represents the 

distance Julie falls after 30 sec. 
3. If Julie pulls her ripcord at an altitude of 3000 ft, how long does she spend in a free fall? 
4. Julie pulls her ripcord at 3000 ft. It takes 5 sec for her parachute to open completely and for her to slow down, 

during which time she falls another 400 ft. After her canopy is fully open, her speed is reduced to 16 ft/sec. Find 
the total time Julie spends in the air, from the time she leaves the airplane until the time her feet touch the 
ground. 
On Julie’s second jump of the day, she decides she wants to fall a little faster and orients herself in the “head 
down” position. Her terminal velocity in this position is 220 ft/sec. Answer these questions based on this velocity: 

5. How long does it take Julie to reach terminal velocity in this case? 
6. Before pulling her ripcord, Julie reorients her body in the “belly down” position so she is not moving quite as fast 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.3 • The Fundamental Theorem of Calculus     483

when her parachute opens. If she begins this maneuver at an altitude of 4000 ft, how long does she spend in a 
free fall before beginning the reorientation? 
Some jumpers wear “wingsuits” (see Figure 5.31). These suits have fabric panels between the arms and legs and 
allow the wearer to glide around in a free fall, much like a flying squirrel. (Indeed, the suits are sometimes called 
“flying squirrel suits.”) When wearing these suits, terminal velocity can be reduced to about 30 mph (44 ft/sec), 
allowing the wearers a much longer time in the air. Wingsuit flyers still use parachutes to land; although the 
vertical velocities are within the margin of safety, horizontal velocities can exceed 70 mph, much too fast to land 
safely. 

Figure 5.31 The fabric panels on the arms and legs of a wingsuit work to reduce the vertical velocity of a skydiver’s 
fall. (credit: Richard Schneider) 

Answer the following question based on the velocity in a wingsuit. 

7. If Julie dons a wingsuit before her third jump of the day, and she pulls her ripcord at an altitude of 3000 ft, how 
long does she get to spend gliding around in the air? 

 SECTION 5.3 EXERCISES 
144. Consider two athletes  145 . Two mountain climbers  146 . To get on a certain toll 

running at variable start their climb at base road a driver has to take a 
speeds  and camp, taking two card that lists the mile 
The runners start and different routes, one entrance point. The card 
finish a race at exactly the steeper than the other, also has a timestamp. 
same time. Explain why and arrive at the peak at When going to pay the 
the two runners must be exactly the same time. Is toll at the exit, the driver 
going the same speed at it necessarily true that, at is surprised to receive a 
some point. some point, both climbers speeding ticket along 

increased in altitude at with the toll. Explain how 
the same rate? this can happen. 

147. Set 

Find  and the 
average value of  over 



484     5 • Integration

In the following exercises, use the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus, Part 1, to find each derivative. 

148.  149 .  150 . 

151.  152 .  153 . 

154.  155 .  156 . 

157.  158 .  159 . 

160. The graph of  where1f6 1 . The graph of  where f 

is a piecewise constant function, is is a piecewise constant function, is 
shown here. shown here. 

a. Over which intervals is f positive? a. Over which intervals is f positive? 
Over which intervals is it negative? Over which intervals is it negative? 
Over which intervals, if any, is it Over which intervals, if any, is it 
equal to zero? equal to zero? 

b. What are the maximum and b. What are the maximum and 
minimum values of f? minimum values of f? 

c. What is the average value of f? c. What is the average value of f? 

162. The graph of  where1ℓ6 3 . The graph of  where ℓ 

is a piecewise linear function, is is a piecewise linear function, is 
shown here. shown here. 

a. Over which intervals is ℓ positive? 
Over which intervals is it negative? 

a. Over which intervals is ℓ positive? Over which, if any, is it zero? 
Over which intervals is it negative? b. Over which intervals is ℓ 
Over which, if any, is it zero? increasing? Over which is it 

b. Over which intervals is ℓ decreasing? Over which intervals, 
increasing? Over which is it if any, is it constant? 
decreasing? Over which, if any, is c. What is the average value of ℓ? 
it constant? 

c. What is the average value of ℓ? 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.3 • The Fundamental Theorem of Calculus     485

In the following exercises, use a calculator to estimate the area under the curve by computing T10, the average of the 
left- and right-endpoint Riemann sums using  rectangles. Then, using the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus, 
Part 2, determine the exact area. 

164. [T]  over  165 . [T]  166 . [T]  over 
over 

167. [T]  over  168 . [T]  169 . [T]  over 

over 

In the following exercises, evaluate each definite integral using the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus, Part 2. 

170.  171 .  172 . 

173.  174 .  175 . 

176.  177 .  178 . 

179.  180 .  181 . 

182.  183 .  184 . 

185.  186 .  187 . 

188.  189 . 

In the following exercises, use the evaluation theorem to express the integral as a function 

190.  191 .  192 . 

193. 

In the following exercises, identify the roots of the integrand to remove absolute values, then evaluate using the 
Fundamental Theorem of Calculus, Part 2. 

194.  195 .  196 . 



486     5 • Integration

197.  198 . Suppose that the number  199 . Suppose the rate of 
of hours of daylight on a gasoline consumption over 
given day in Seattle is the course of a year in the 
modeled by the function United States can be 

modeled by a sinusoidal 
with t given in months function of the form 
and  corresponding 
to the winter solstice. gal/mo. 
a. What is the average a. What is the average 

number of daylight monthly consumption, 
hours in a year? and for which values of 

b. At which times t1 and t is the rate at time t 
t2, where equal to the average 

 do rate? 
the number of daylight b. What is the number of 
hours equal the gallons of gasoline 
average number? consumed in the United 

c. Write an integral that States in a year? 
expresses the total c. Write an integral that 
number of daylight expresses the average 
hours in Seattle monthly U.S. gas 
between  and consumption during 

d. Compute the mean the part of the year 
hours of daylight in between the beginning 
Seattle between  and of April  and the 

 where end of September 
 and 

then between  and 
 and show that the 

average of the two is 
equal to the average 
day length. 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.3 • The Fundamental Theorem of Calculus     487

200. Explain why, if f is  201 . Explain why, if f is  202 . Kepler’s first law states that the 
continuous over continuous over  and planets move in elliptical orbits with 
there is at least one point is not equal to a constant, the Sun at one focus. The closest 

 such that there is at least one point point of a planetary orbit to the Sun 
 such that is called the perihelion (for Earth, it 

currently occurs around January 3) 
and the farthest point is called the 

and at least one point aphelion (for Earth, it currently occurs 
 such that around July 4). Kepler’s second law 

states that planets sweep out equal 
areas of their elliptical orbits in equal 
times. Thus, the two arcs indicated in 
the following figure are swept out in 
equal times. At what time of year is 
Earth moving fastest in its orbit? 
When is it moving slowest? 

203. A point on an ellipse with  204 . As implied earlier,  205 . The force of gravitational 
major axis length 2a and according to Kepler’s attraction between the 
minor axis length 2b has laws, Earth’s orbit is an Sun and a planet is 
the coordinates ellipse with the Sun at  where m is 

one focus. The perihelion 
a. Show that the distance for Earth’s orbit around the mass of the planet, M 

from this point to the the Sun is 147,098,290 km is the mass of the Sun, G 
focus at  is and the aphelion is is a universal constant, 

152,098,232 km. and  is the distance 

where a. By placing the major between the Sun and the 

b. Use these coordinates axis along the x-axis, planet when the planet is 
at an angle θ with the 

to show that the find the average 
average distance  from distance from Earth to major axis of its orbit. 

Assuming that M, m, and 
a point on the ellipse to the Sun. 
the focus at b. The classic definition the ellipse parameters a 

with respect to angle θ, of an astronomical and b (half-lengths of the 

is a. unit (AU) is the major and minor axes) 
distance from Earth to are given, set up—but do 
the Sun, and its value not evaluate—an integral 
was computed as the that expresses in terms of 
average of the  the average 
perihelion and gravitational force 
aphelion distances. Is between the Sun and the 
this definition planet. 
justified? 



488     5 • Integration

206. The displacement from 
rest of a mass attached to 
a spring satisfies the 
simple harmonic motion 
equation 

where  is a phase 
constant, ω is the angular 
frequency, and A is the 
amplitude. Find the 
average velocity, the 
average speed 
(magnitude of velocity), 
the average 
displacement, and the 
average distance from 
rest (magnitude of 
displacement) of the 
mass. 

5.4 Integration Formulas and the Net Change Theorem 
Learning Objectives 

5.4.1 Apply the basic integration formulas. 
5.4.2 Explain the significance of the net change theorem. 
5.4.3 Use the net change theorem to solve applied problems. 
5.4.4 Apply the integrals of odd and even functions. 

In this section, we use some basic integration formulas studied previously to solve some key applied problems. It is 
important to note that these formulas are presented in terms of indefinite integrals. Although definite and indefinite 
integrals are closely related, there are some key differences to keep in mind. A definite integral is either a number (when 
the limits of integration are constants) or a single function (when one or both of the limits of integration are variables). 
An indefinite integral represents a family of functions, all of which differ by a constant. As you become more familiar with 
integration, you will get a feel for when to use definite integrals and when to use indefinite integrals. You will naturally 
select the correct approach for a given problem without thinking too much about it. However, until these concepts are 
cemented in your mind, think carefully about whether you need a definite integral or an indefinite integral and make 
sure you are using the proper notation based on your choice. 

Basic Integration Formulas 
Recall the integration formulas given in the table in Antiderivatives and the rule on properties of definite integrals. Let’s 
look at a few examples of how to apply these rules. 

EXAMPLE 5.23 

Integrating a Function Using the Power Rule 

Use the power rule to integrate the function 

Solution 
The first step is to rewrite the function and simplify it so we can apply the power rule: 

Now apply the power rule: 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.4 • Integration Formulas and the Net Change Theorem     489

 5.21 Find the definite integral of  over the interval 

The Net Change Theorem 
The net change theorem considers the integral of a rate of change. It says that when a quantity changes, the new value 
equals the initial value plus the integral of the rate of change of that quantity. The formula can be expressed in two ways. 
The second is more familiar; it is simply the definite integral. 

Theorem 5.6 

Net Change Theorem 
The new value of a changing quantity equals the initial value plus the integral of the rate of change: 

(5.18) 

Subtracting  from both sides of the first equation yields the second equation. Since they are equivalent formulas, 
which one we use depends on the application. 
The significance of the net change theorem lies in the results. Net change can be applied to area, distance, and volume, 
to name only a few applications. Net change accounts for negative quantities automatically without having to write more 
than one integral. To illustrate, let’s apply the net change theorem to a velocity function in which the result is 
displacement. 
We looked at a simple example of this in The Definite Integral. Suppose a car is moving due north (the positive direction) 
at 40 mph between 2 p.m. and 4 p.m., then the car moves south at 30 mph between 4 p.m. and 5 p.m. We can graph this 
motion as shown in Figure 5.32. 

Figure 5.32 The graph shows speed versus time for the given motion of a car. 
Just as we did before, we can use definite integrals to calculate the net displacement as well as the total distance 
traveled. The net displacement is given by 



490     5 • Integration

Thus, at 5 p.m. the car is 50 mi north of its starting position. The total distance traveled is given by 

Therefore, between 2 p.m. and 5 p.m., the car traveled a total of 110 mi. 
To summarize, net displacement may include both positive and negative values. In other words, the velocity function 
accounts for both forward distance and backward distance. To find net displacement, integrate the velocity function over 
the interval. Total distance traveled, on the other hand, is always positive. To find the total distance traveled by an object, 
regardless of direction, we need to integrate the absolute value of the velocity function. 

EXAMPLE 5.24 

Finding Net Displacement 
Given a velocity function  (in meters per second) for a particle in motion from time  to time  find 
the net displacement of the particle. 

Solution 
Applying the net change theorem, we have 

The net displacement is  m (Figure 5.33). 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.4 • Integration Formulas and the Net Change Theorem     491

Figure 5.33 The graph shows velocity versus time for a particle moving with a linear velocity function. 

EXAMPLE 5.25 

Finding the Total Distance Traveled 
Use Example 5.24 to find the total distance traveled by a particle according to the velocity function  m/sec 
over a time interval 

Solution 
The total distance traveled includes both the positive and the negative values. Therefore, we must integrate the absolute 
value of the velocity function to find the total distance traveled. 
To continue with the example, use two integrals to find the total distance. First, find the t-intercept of the function, since 
that is where the division of the interval occurs. Set the equation equal to zero and solve for t. Thus, 

The two subintervals are  and  To find the total distance traveled, integrate the absolute value of the 
function. Since the function is negative over the interval  we have  over that interval. Over 
the function is positive, so  Thus, we have 



492     5 • Integration

So, the total distance traveled is  m. 

 5.22 Find the net displacement and total distance traveled in meters given the velocity function 
over the interval 

Applying the Net Change Theorem 
The net change theorem can be applied to the flow and consumption of fluids, as shown in Example 5.26. 

EXAMPLE 5.26 

How Many Gallons of Gasoline Are Consumed? 
If the motor on a motorboat is started at  and the boat consumes gasoline at the rate of  gal/hr, how much 
gasoline is used in the first 2 hours? 

Solution 
Express the problem as a definite integral, integrate, and evaluate using the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus. The 
limits of integration are the endpoints of the interval  We have 

Thus, the motorboat uses 9.6 gal of gas in 2 hours. 

EXAMPLE 5.27 

Chapter Opener: Iceboats 

Figure 5.34 (credit: modification of work by Carter Brown, Flickr) 
As we saw at the beginning of the chapter, top iceboat racers (Figure 5.1) can attain speeds of up to five times the wind 
speed. Andrew is an intermediate iceboater, though, so he attains speeds equal to only twice the wind speed. Suppose 
Andrew takes his iceboat out one morning when a light 5-mph breeze has been blowing all morning. As Andrew gets his 
iceboat set up, though, the wind begins to pick up. During his first half hour of iceboating, the wind speed increases 
according to the function  For the second half hour of Andrew’s outing, the wind remains steady at 15 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.4 • Integration Formulas and the Net Change Theorem     493

mph. In other words, the wind speed is given by 

Recalling that Andrew’s iceboat travels at twice the wind speed, and assuming he moves in a straight line away from his 
starting point, how far is Andrew from his starting point after 1 hour? 

Solution 
To figure out how far Andrew has traveled, we need to integrate his velocity, which is twice the wind speed. Then 

Distance 

Substituting the expressions we were given for  we get 

Andrew is 25 mi from his starting point after 1 hour. 

 5.23 Suppose that, instead of remaining steady during the second half hour of Andrew’s outing, the wind starts 
to die down according to the function  In other words, the wind speed is given by 

Under these conditions, how far from his starting point is Andrew after 1 hour? 

Integrating Even and Odd Functions 
We saw in Functions and Graphs that an even function is a function in which  for all x in the domain—that 
is, the graph of the curve is unchanged when x is replaced with −x. The graphs of even functions are symmetric about 
the y-axis. An odd function is one in which  for all x in the domain, and the graph of the function is 
symmetric about the origin. 
Integrals of even functions, when the limits of integration are from −a to a, involve two equal areas, because they are 
symmetric about the y-axis. Integrals of odd functions, when the limits of integration are similarly  evaluate to 
zero because the areas above and below the x-axis are equal. 

Rule: Integrals of Even and Odd Functions 

For continuous even functions such that 

For continuous odd functions such that 



494     5 • Integration

EXAMPLE 5.28 

Integrating an Even Function 

Integrate the even function  and verify that the integration formula for even functions holds. 

Solution 
The symmetry appears in the graphs in Figure 5.35. Graph (a) shows the region below the curve and above the x-axis. We 
have to zoom in to this graph by a huge amount to see the region. Graph (b) shows the region above the curve and 
below the x-axis. The signed area of this region is negative. Both views illustrate the symmetry about the y-axis of an 
even function. We have 

To verify the integration formula for even functions, we can calculate the integral from 0 to 2 and double it, then check to 
make sure we get the same answer. 

Since  we have verified the formula for even functions in this particular example. 

Figure 5.35 Graph (a) shows the positive area between the curve and the x-axis, whereas graph (b) shows the negative 
area between the curve and the x-axis. Both views show the symmetry about the y-axis. 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.4 • Integration Formulas and the Net Change Theorem     495

EXAMPLE 5.29 

Integrating an Odd Function 
Evaluate the definite integral of the odd function  over the interval 

Solution 
The graph is shown in Figure 5.36. We can see the symmetry about the origin by the positive area above the x-axis over 

 and the negative area below the x-axis over  We have 

Figure 5.36 The graph shows areas between a curve and the x-axis for an odd function. 

 5.24 Integrate the function 

 SECTION 5.4 EXERCISES 
Use basic integration formulas to compute the following antiderivatives or definite integrals. 

207.  208 .  209 . 

210.  211 .  212 . 



496     5 • Integration

213. Write an integral that  214 . Write an integral that  215 . A regular N-gon (an 
expresses the increase in quantifies the change in N-sided polygon with 
the perimeter  of a the area  of a sides that have equal 
square when its side square when the side length s, such as a 
length s increases from 2 length doubles from S pentagon or hexagon) 
units to 4 units and units to 2S units and has perimeter Ns. Write 
evaluate the integral. evaluate the integral. an integral that expresses 

the increase in perimeter 
of a regular N-gon when 
the length of each side 
increases from 1 unit to 2 
units and evaluate the 
integral. 

216. The area of a regular  217 . A dodecahedron is a  218 . An icosahedron is a 
pentagon with side length Platonic solid with a Platonic solid with a 

 is pa2 with surface that consists of 12 surface that consists of 20 
pentagons, each of equal equilateral triangles. By 
area. By how much does how much does the 

The Pentagon in the surface area of a surface area of an 
Washington, DC, has dodecahedron increase as icosahedron increase as 
inner sides of length 360 the side length of each the side length of each 
ft and outer sides of pentagon doubles from 1 triangle doubles from a 
length 920 ft. Write an unit to 2 units? unit to 2a units? 
integral to express the 
area of the roof of the 
Pentagon according to 
these dimensions and 
evaluate this area. 

219. Write an integral that  220 . Write an integral that  221 . Write an integral that 
quantifies the change in quantifies the increase in quantifies the increase in 
the area of the surface of the volume of a cube the surface area of a 
a cube when its side when the side length sphere as its radius 
length doubles from s doubles from s unit to 2s doubles from R unit to 2R 
unit to 2s units and units and evaluate the units and evaluate the 
evaluate the integral. integral. integral. 

222. Write an integral that  223 . Suppose that a particle  224 . Suppose that a particle 
quantifies the increase in moves along a straight moves along a straight 
the volume of a sphere as line with velocity line with velocity defined 
its radius doubles from R  where by 
unit to 2R units and  (in meters per where  (in 
evaluate the integral. second). Find the meters per second). Find 

displacement at time t the displacement at time t 
and the total distance and the total distance 
traveled up to traveled up to 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.4 • Integration Formulas and the Net Change Theorem     497

225. Suppose that a particle  226 . Suppose that a particle  227 . A ball is thrown upward 
moves along a straight moves along a straight from a height of 1.5 m at 
line with velocity defined line with acceleration an initial speed of 40 m/
by  where defined by sec. Acceleration resulting 

 (in meters per where  (in from gravity is −9.8 m/
second). Find the meters per second). Find sec2. Neglecting air 
displacement at time t the velocity and resistance, solve for the 
and the total distance displacement at time t velocity  and the 
traveled up to and the total distance height  of the ball t 

traveled up to  if seconds after it is thrown 
 and and before it returns to 

the ground. 
228. A ball is thrown upward  229 . The area  of a circular  230 . A spherical balloon is 

from a height of 3 m at an shape is growing at a being inflated at a 
initial speed of 60 m/sec. constant rate. If the area constant rate. If the 
Acceleration resulting increases from 4π units to volume of the balloon 
from gravity is −9.8 m/ 9π units between times changes from 36π in.3 to 
sec2. Neglecting air  and  find the 288π in.3 between time 
resistance, solve for the net change in the radius  and 
velocity  and the during that time. seconds, find the net 
height  of the ball t change in the radius of 
seconds after it is thrown the balloon during that 
and before it returns to time. 
the ground. 



498     5 • Integration

231. Water flows into a conical  232 . A horizontal cylindrical  233 . The following table lists the 
tank with cross-sectional tank has cross-sectional electrical power in gigawatts—the 
area πx2 at height x and area rate at which energy is 
volume  up to height  at consumed—used in a certain city 
x. If water flows into the height x meters above the for different hours of the day, in a 
tank at a rate of 1 bottom when typical 24-hour period, with hour 
m3/min, find the height of a. The volume V between 1 corresponding to midnight to 1 
water in the tank after 5 heights a and b is a.m. 
min. Find the change in  Find the 
height between 5 min and Hour Power Hour Power 
10 min. volume at heights 

between 2 m and 3 m. 1 28 13 48 
b. Suppose that oil is 

being pumped into the 2 25 14 49 
tank at a rate of 50 L/
min. Using the chain 3 24 15 49 
rule,  at 
how many meters per 4 23 16 50 
minute is the height of 
oil in the tank 5 24 17 50 
changing, expressed in 
terms of x, when the 6 27 18 50 
height is at x meters? 

c. How long does it take 7 29 19 46 
to fill the tank to 3 m 
starting from a fill level 
of 2 m? 8 32 20 43 

9 34 21 42 

10 39 22 40 

11 42 23 37 

12 46 24 34 

Find the total amount of energy in 
gigawatt-hours (gW-h) consumed 
by the city in a typical 24-hour 
period. 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.4 • Integration Formulas and the Net Change Theorem     499

234. The average residential electrical  235 . The data in the following table are 
power use (in hundreds of watts) used to estimate the average power 
per hour is given in the following output produced by Peter Sagan for 
table. each of the last 18 sec of Stage 1 of 

the 2012 Tour de France. 
Hour Power Hour Power 

Second Watts Second Watts 
1 8 13 12 

1 600 10 1200 
2 6 14 13 

2 500 11 1170 
3 5 15 14 

3 575 12 1125 
4 4 16 15 

4 1050 13 1100 
5 5 17 17 

5 925 14 1075 
6 6 18 19 

6 950 15 1000 
7 7 19 18 

7 1050 16 950 
8 8 20 17 

8 950 17 900 
9 9 21 16 

9 1100 18 780 
10 10 22 16 

Table 5.6 Average Power Output 
11 10 23 13 Source: sportsexercisengineering.com 

12 11 24 11 Estimate the net energy used in 
kilojoules (kJ), noting that 1W = 1 J/s, 
and the average power output by 

a. Compute the average total Sagan during this time interval. 
energy used in a day in 
kilowatt-hours (kWh). 

b. If a ton of coal generates 1842 
kWh, how long does it take for 
an average residence to burn a 
ton of coal? 

c. Explain why the data might fit 
a plot of the form 



500     5 • Integration

236. The data in the following table are used  237 . The distribution of incomes as of 2012 in the 
to estimate the average power output United States in $5000 increments is given in the 
produced by Peter Sagan for each following table. The kth row denotes the 
15-min interval of Stage 1 of the 2012 percentage of households with incomes between 
Tour de France.  and  The row 

contains all households with income between 
Minutes Watts Minutes Watts $200,000 and $250,000. 

15 200 165 170 0 3.5 11 3.5 21 1.5 31 0.6 

30 180 180 220 1 4.1 12 3.7 22 1.4 32 0.5 

45 190 195 140 2 5.9 13 3.2 23 1.3 33 0.5 

60 230 210 225 3 5.7 14 3.0 24 1.3 34 0.4 

75 240 225 170 4 5.9 15 2.8 25 1.1 35 0.3 

90 210 240 210 5 5.4 16 2.5 26 1.0 36 0.3 

105 210 255 200 6 5.5 17 2.2 27 0.75 37 0.3 

120 220 270 220 7 5.1 18 2.2 28 0.8 38 0.2 

135 210 285 250 8 4.8 19 1.8 29 1.0 39 1.8 

150 150 300 400 9 4.1 20 2.1 30 0.6 40 2.3 

Table 5.7 Average Power Output 10 4.3 
Source: sportsexercisengineering.com 

Table 5.8 Income Distributions Source: 
Estimate the net energy used in http://www.census.gov/prod/2013pubs/
kilojoules, noting that 1W = 1 J/s. p60-245.pdf 

a. Estimate the percentage of U.S. households in 
2012 with incomes less than $55,000. 

b. What percentage of households had incomes 
exceeding $85,000? 

c. Plot the data and try to fit its shape to that of 
a graph of the form  for 
suitable 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.4 • Integration Formulas and the Net Change Theorem     501

238. Newton’s law of gravity states  239 . For a given motor vehicle,  240. John is a 25-year old man 
that the gravitational force the maximum achievable who weighs 160 lb. He 
exerted by an object of mass M deceleration from braking burns  calories/
and one of mass m with is approximately 7 m/sec2 hr while riding his bike for 
centers that are separated by a on dry concrete. On wet t hours. If an oatmeal 
distance r is  with G asphalt, it is cookie has 55 cal and 
an empirical constant approximately 2.5 m/sec2. John eats cookies at a rate 

Given that 1 mph of 4t calories during the 
corresponds to 0.447 m/ tth hour, how many net 

The work done by a variable sec, find the total distance calories has he lost after 3 
force over an interval  is that a car travels in hours riding his bike? 
defined as meters on dry concrete 

after the brakes are 
If Earth has mass applied until it comes to a 

 and radius complete stop if the initial 
6371 km, compute the amount velocity is 67 mph (30 m/
of work to elevate a polar sec) or if the initial 
weather satellite of mass 1400 braking velocity is 56 mph 
kg to its orbiting altitude of (25 m/sec). Find the 
850 km above Earth. corresponding distances 

if the surface is slippery 
wet asphalt. 

241. Sandra is a 25-year old  242 . A motor vehicle has a  243 . Although some engines 
woman who weighs 120 maximum efficiency of 33 are more efficient at given 
lb. She burns mpg at a cruising speed a horsepower than 
cal/hr while walking on of 40 mph. The efficiency others, on average, fuel 
her treadmill. Her caloric drops at a rate of 0.1 efficiency decreases with 
intake from drinking mpg/mph between 40 horsepower at a rate of 
Gatorade is 100t calories/ mph and 50 mph, and at  mpg/horsepower. If 
hour during the tth hour. a rate of 0.4 mpg/mph a typical 50-horsepower 
What is her net decrease between 50 mph and 80 engine has an average 
in calories after walking mph. What is the fuel efficiency of 32 mpg, 
for 3 hours? efficiency in miles per what is the average fuel 

gallon if the car is cruising efficiency of an engine 
at 50 mph? What is the with the following 
efficiency in miles per horsepower: 150, 300, 
gallon if the car is cruising 450? 
at 80 mph? If gasoline 
costs $3.50/gal, what is 
the cost of fuel to drive 50 
mi at 40 mph, at 50 mph, 
and at 80 mph? 



502     5 • Integration

244. [T] The following table lists the 2013 schedule of  245 . [T] The following table provides 
federal income tax versus taxable income. hypothetical data regarding the level 

of service for a certain highway. 

Taxable Income The Tax Is … Of the 
Range … Amount Highway 

Over Speed Vehicles Density 

Range per Hour Range 
per Lane (vehicles/

$0–$8925 10% $0 (mph) mi) 

$8925–$36,250 $892.50 + $8925 > 60 < 600 < 10 
15% 

60–57 600–1000 10–20 
$36,250–$87,850 $4,991.25 + $36,250 

25% 57–54 1000–1500 20–30 

$87,850–$183,250 $17,891.25 $87,850 54–46 1500–1900 30–45 
+ 28% 

46–30 1900–2100 45–70 
$183,250–$398,350 $44,603.25 $183,250 

+ 33% <30 Unstable 70–200 

$398,350–$400,000 $115,586.25 $398,350 Table 5.10 
+ 35% 

a. Plot vehicles per hour per lane on 
> $400,000 $116,163.75 $400,000 the x-axis and highway speed on 

+ 39.6% the y-axis. 
b. Compute the average decrease in 

Table 5.9 Federal Income Tax Versus Taxable speed (in miles per hour) per unit 
Income Source: http://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-prior/ increase in congestion (vehicles 
i1040tt--2013.pdf. per hour per lane) as the latter 

increases from 600 to 1000, from 
Suppose that Steve just received a $10,000 raise. 1000 to 1500, and from 1500 to 
How much of this raise is left after federal taxes 2100. Does the decrease in miles 
if Steve’s salary before receiving the raise was per hour depend linearly on the 
$40,000? If it was $90,000? If it was $385,000? increase in vehicles per hour per 

lane? 
c. Plot minutes per mile (60 times the 

reciprocal of miles per hour) as a 
function of vehicles per hour per 
lane. Is this function linear? 

For the next two exercises use the data in the following table, which displays bald eagle populations from 1963 to 2000 in 
the continental United States. 

Year Population of Breeding Pairs of Bald Eagles 

1963 487 

1974 791 

1981 1188 

Table 5.11 Population of Breeding Bald Eagle Pairs 
Source: http://www.fws.gov/Midwest/eagle/population/
chtofprs.html. 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.4 • Integration Formulas and the Net Change Theorem     503

Year Population of Breeding Pairs of Bald Eagles 

1986 1875 

1992 3749 

1996 5094 

2000 6471 

Table 5.11 Population of Breeding Bald Eagle Pairs 
Source: http://www.fws.gov/Midwest/eagle/population/
chtofprs.html. 

246. [T] The graph below plots the  247 . [T] The graph below plots the cubic 
quadratic 

against the data in the preceding table, 
against the data in preceding table, normalized so that  corresponds to 
normalized so that  corresponds 1963. Estimate the average number of bald 
to 1963. Estimate the average eagles per year present for the 37 years by 
number of bald eagles per year computing the average value of p over 
present for the 37 years by 
computing the average value of p 
over 



504     5 • Integration

248. [T] Suppose you go on a road 
trip and record your speed at 
every half hour, as compiled in 
the following table. The best 
quadratic fit to the data is 

 shown 
in the accompanying graph. 
Integrate q to estimate the total 
distance driven over the 3 
hours. 

Time (hr) Speed (mph) 

0 (start) 50 

1 40 

2 50 

3 60 

As a car accelerates, it does not accelerate at a constant rate; rather, the acceleration is variable. For the following 
exercises, use the following table, which contains the acceleration measured at every second as a driver merges onto a 
freeway. 

Time (sec) Acceleration (mph/sec) 

1 11.2 

2 10.6 

3 8.1 

4 5.4 

5 0 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.4 • Integration Formulas and the Net Change Theorem     505

As a car accelerates, it does not accelerate at a constant rate; rather, the acceleration is variable. For the next three 
exercises use the following table, which contains the acceleration measured at every second as a driver merges onto a 
freeway. 

Time (sec) Acceleration (mph/sec) 

1 11.2 

2 10.6 

3 8.1 

4 5.4 

5 0 

Table 5.12 

249. [T] The accompanying graph plots  250 . [T] Using your  251 . [T] Using your velocity 
the best quadratic fit, acceleration equation equation from the 

 to from the previous previous exercise, find the 
the data from the preceding table. exercise, find the corresponding distance 
Compute the average value of  to corresponding velocity equation, assuming your 
estimate the average acceleration equation. Assuming the initial distance is 0 mi. 
between  and initial velocity is 65 mph, How far did you travel 

find the velocity at time while you accelerated 
your car? (Hint: You will 
need to convert time 
units.) 



506     5 • Integration

252. [T] The number of hamburgers sold at  253 . [T] An athlete runs by a motion 
a restaurant throughout the day is detector, which records her speed, as 
given in the following table, with the displayed in the following table. The 
accompanying graph plotting the best best linear fit to this data, 
cubic fit to the data,  is shown in 

the accompanying graph. Use the 
with  corresponding to 9 a.m. and average value of  between 

 corresponding to 9 p.m. and  to estimate the runner’s 
Compute the average value of  to average speed. 
estimate the average number of 
hamburgers sold per hour. Minutes Speed (m/sec) 

Hours Past No. of Burgers 0 5 
Midnight Sold 

10 4.8 
9 3 

20 3.6 
12 28 

30 3.0 
15 20 

40 2.5 
18 30 

21 45 

5.5 Substitution 
Learning Objectives 

5.5.1 Use substitution to evaluate indefinite integrals. 
5.5.2 Use substitution to evaluate definite integrals. 

The Fundamental Theorem of Calculus gave us a method to evaluate integrals without using Riemann sums. The 
drawback of this method, though, is that we must be able to find an antiderivative, and this is not always easy. In this 
section we examine a technique, called integration by substitution, to help us find antiderivatives. Specifically, this 
method helps us find antiderivatives when the integrand is the result of a chain-rule derivative. 
At first, the approach to the substitution procedure may not appear very obvious. However, it is primarily a visual 
task—that is, the integrand shows you what to do; it is a matter of recognizing the form of the function. So, what are we 
supposed to see? We are looking for an integrand of the form  For example, in the integral 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.5 • Substitution     507

 we have  and  Then, 

and we see that our integrand is in the correct form. 
The method is called substitution because we substitute part of the integrand with the variable u and part of the 
integrand with du. It is also referred to as change of variables because we are changing variables to obtain an 
expression that is easier to work with for applying the integration rules. 

Theorem 5.7 

Substitution with Indefinite Integrals 
Let  where  is continuous over an interval, let  be continuous over the corresponding range of g, 
and let  be an antiderivative of  Then, 

(5.19) 

Proof 
Let f, g, u, and F be as specified in the theorem. Then 

Integrating both sides with respect to x, we see that 

If we now substitute  and  we get 

□ 

Returning to the problem we looked at originally, we let  and then  Rewrite the integral in terms of 
u: 

Using the power rule for integrals, we have 

Substitute the original expression for x back into the solution: 

We can generalize the procedure in the following Problem-Solving Strategy. 



508     5 • Integration

Problem-Solving Strategy 

Integration by Substitution 
1. Look carefully at the integrand and select an expression  within the integrand to set equal to u. Let’s select 

 such that  is also part of the integrand. 
2. Substitute  and  into the integral. 
3. We should now be able to evaluate the integral with respect to u. If the integral can’t be evaluated we need to go 

back and select a different expression to use as u. 
4. Evaluate the integral in terms of u. 
5. Write the result in terms of x and the expression 

EXAMPLE 5.30 

Using Substitution to Find an Antiderivative 
Use substitution to find the antiderivative 

Solution 
The first step is to choose an expression for u. We choose  because then  and we already have du 
in the integrand. Write the integral in terms of u: 

Remember that du is the derivative of the expression chosen for u, regardless of what is inside the integrand. Now we 
can evaluate the integral with respect to u: 

Analysis 
We can check our answer by taking the derivative of the result of integration. We should obtain the integrand. Picking a 
value for C of 1, we let  We have 

so 

This is exactly the expression we started with inside the integrand. 

 5.25 Use substitution to find the antiderivative 

Sometimes we need to adjust the constants in our integral if they don’t match up exactly with the expressions we are 
substituting. 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.5 • Substitution     509

EXAMPLE 5.31 

Using Substitution with Alteration 
Use substitution to find 

Solution 
Rewrite the integral as  Let  and  Now we have a problem because 

and the original expression has only  We have to alter our expression for du or the integral in u will be twice as large 
as it should be. If we multiply both sides of the du equation by  we can solve this problem. Thus, 

Write the integral in terms of u, but pull the  outside the integration symbol: 

Integrate the expression in u: 

 5.26 Use substitution to find 

EXAMPLE 5.32 

Using Substitution with Integrals of Trigonometric Functions 
Use substitution to evaluate the integral 

Solution 
We know the derivative of  is  so we set  Then  Substituting into the integral, we have 

Evaluating the integral, we get 

Putting the answer back in terms of t, we get 



510     5 • Integration

 5.27 Use substitution to evaluate the integral 

Sometimes we need to manipulate an integral in ways that are more complicated than just multiplying or dividing by a 
constant. We need to eliminate all the expressions within the integrand that are in terms of the original variable. When 
we are done, u should be the only variable in the integrand. In some cases, this means solving for the original variable in 
terms of u. This technique should become clear in the next example. 

EXAMPLE 5.33 

Finding an Antiderivative Using u-Substitution 

Use substitution to find the antiderivative 

Solution 
If we let  then  But this does not account for the x in the numerator of the integrand. We need to 
express x in terms of u. If  then  Now we can rewrite the integral in terms of u: 

Then we integrate in the usual way, replace u with the original expression, and factor and simplify the result. Thus, 

 5.28 Use substitution to evaluate the indefinite integral 

Substitution for Definite Integrals 
Substitution can be used with definite integrals, too. However, using substitution to evaluate a definite integral requires a 
change to the limits of integration. If we change variables in the integrand, the limits of integration change as well. 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.5 • Substitution     511

Theorem 5.8 

Substitution with Definite Integrals 
Let  and let  be continuous over an interval  and let f be continuous over the range of 
Then, 

Although we will not formally prove this theorem, we justify it with some calculations here. From the substitution rule for 
indefinite integrals, if  is an antiderivative of  we have 

Then 

(5.20) 

and we have the desired result. 

EXAMPLE 5.34 

Using Substitution to Evaluate a Definite Integral 

Use substitution to evaluate 

Solution 
Let  so  Since the original function includes one factor of x2 and  multiply both 
sides of the du equation by  Then, 

To adjust the limits of integration, note that when  and when  Then 

Evaluating this expression, we get 



512     5 • Integration

 5.29 Use substitution to evaluate the definite integral 

EXAMPLE 5.35 

Using Substitution with an Exponential Function 

Use substitution to evaluate 

Solution 
Let  Then,  To adjust the limits of integration, we note that when  and when 

 So our substitution gives 

 5.30 Use substitution to evaluate 

Substitution may be only one of the techniques needed to evaluate a definite integral. All of the properties and rules of 
integration apply independently, and trigonometric functions may need to be rewritten using a trigonometric identity 
before we can apply substitution. Also, we have the option of replacing the original expression for u after we find the 
antiderivative, which means that we do not have to change the limits of integration. These two approaches are shown in 
Example 5.36. 

EXAMPLE 5.36 

Using Substitution to Evaluate a Trigonometric Integral 

Use substitution to evaluate 

Solution 
Let us first use a trigonometric identity to rewrite the integral. The trig identity  allows us to rewrite the 
integral as 

Then, 

We can evaluate the first integral as it is, but we need to make a substitution to evaluate the second integral. Let 
Then,  or  Also, when  and when  Expressing the second integral in terms 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.5 • Substitution     513

of u, we have 

 SECTION 5.5 EXERCISES 
254. Why is u-substitution  255 . 2. If  when 

referred to as change of reversing the chain rule, 
variable? 

should you take  or 

In the following exercises, verify each identity using differentiation. Then, using the indicated u-substitution, identify f 
such that the integral takes the form 

256. 

257. For 

258. 

259.  260 . 

In the following exercises, find the antiderivative using the indicated substitution. 

261.  262 .  263 . 

264.  265 .  266 . 

267.  268 . 

269.  270 . 

In the following exercises, use a suitable change of variables to determine the indefinite integral. 

271.  272 .  273 . 

274.  275 .  276 . 



514     5 • Integration

277.  278 .  279. 

280.  281 .  282 . 

283.  284 .  285 . 

286.  287 . 

In the following exercises, use a calculator to estimate the area under the curve using left Riemann sums with 50 terms, 
then use substitution to solve for the exact answer. 

288. [T]  over  289 . [T]  over  290 . [T] 
over 

291. [T]  over 

In the following exercises, use a change of variables to evaluate the definite integral. 

292.  293 .  294 . 

295.  296 .  297 . 

In the following exercises, evaluate the indefinite integral  with constant  using u-substitution. Then, 

graph the function and the antiderivative over the indicated interval. If possible, estimate a value of C that would need to 
be added to the antiderivative to make it equal to the definite integral  with a the left endpoint of 

the given interval. 

298. [T]  299 . [T]  on  300 . [T] 

over 

over 

301. [T]  over  302 . [T]  303 . [T] 

over 
over 

304. If  in  305 . Is the substitution 
 in the definite 

what can you say about integral 
the value of the integral? 

okay? If not, why not? 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.5 • Substitution     515

In the following exercises, use a change of variables to show that each definite integral is equal to zero. 

306.  307 .  308 . 

309.  310 .  311 . 

312.  313 . Show that the average  314 . Find the area under the 
value of  over an graph of 
interval  is the same 
as the average value of between  and 

 over the interval where  and  is 
 for fixed, and evaluate the 

limit as ∞
315. Find the area under the  316 . The area of a semicircle of  317 . The area of the top half of 

graph of radius 1 can be expressed an ellipse with a major 
axis that is the x-axis from 

between  and as  Use  to  and with 
where  and a minor axis that is the 

 is fixed. Evaluate the substitution 
the limit as to express the area of a y-axis from  to 

semicircle as the integral  can be written as 
of a trigonometric 
function. You do not need  Use 
to compute the integral. 

the substitution 
 to express this 

area in terms of an 
integral of a 
trigonometric function. 
You do not need to 
compute the integral. 

318. [T] The following graph is of a  319 . [T] The following graph is of a 
function of the form function of the form 

 Estimate 
the coefficients a and b, and the Estimate the coefficients a and b and 
frequency parameters n and m. Use the frequency parameters n and m. 
these estimates to approximate Use these estimates to approximate 



516     5 • Integration

5.6 Integrals Involving Exponential and Logarithmic Functions 
Learning Objectives 

5.6.1 Integrate functions involving exponential functions. 
5.6.2 Integrate functions involving logarithmic functions. 

Exponential and logarithmic functions are used to model population growth, cell growth, and financial growth, as well as 
depreciation, radioactive decay, and resource consumption, to name only a few applications. In this section, we explore 
integration involving exponential and logarithmic functions. 

Integrals of Exponential Functions 
The exponential function is perhaps the most efficient function in terms of the operations of calculus. The exponential 
function,  is its own derivative and its own integral. 

Rule: Integrals of Exponential Functions 

Exponential functions can be integrated using the following formulas. 

(5.21) 

EXAMPLE 5.37 

Finding an Antiderivative of an Exponential Function 
Find the antiderivative of the exponential function e−x. 

Solution 
Use substitution, setting  and then  Multiply the du equation by −1, so you now have  Then, 

 5.31 Find the antiderivative of the function using substitution: 

A common mistake when dealing with exponential expressions is treating the exponent on e the same way we treat 
exponents in polynomial expressions. We cannot use the power rule for the exponent on e. This can be especially 
confusing when we have both exponentials and polynomials in the same expression, as in the previous checkpoint. In 
these cases, we should always double-check to make sure we’re using the right rules for the functions we’re integrating. 

EXAMPLE 5.38 

Square Root of an Exponential Function 
Find the antiderivative of the exponential function 

Solution 
First rewrite the problem using a rational exponent: 

Using substitution, choose  Then,  We have (Figure 5.37) 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.6 • Integrals Involving Exponential and Logarithmic Functions     517

Then 

Figure 5.37 The graph shows an exponential function times the square root of an exponential function. 

 5.32 Find the antiderivative of 

EXAMPLE 5.39 

Using Substitution with an Exponential Function 
Use substitution to evaluate the indefinite integral 

Solution 
Here we choose to let u equal the expression in the exponent on e. Let  and  Again, du is off by a 
constant multiplier; the original function contains a factor of 3x2, not 6x2. Multiply both sides of the equation by  so 
that the integrand in u equals the integrand in x. Thus, 

Integrate the expression in u and then substitute the original expression in x back into the u integral: 

 5.33 Evaluate the indefinite integral 

As mentioned at the beginning of this section, exponential functions are used in many real-life applications. The number 
e is often associated with compounded or accelerating growth, as we have seen in earlier sections about the derivative. 
Although the derivative represents a rate of change or a growth rate, the integral represents the total change or the total 
growth. Let’s look at an example in which integration of an exponential function solves a common business application. 
A price–demand function tells us the relationship between the quantity of a product demanded and the price of the 
product. In general, price decreases as quantity demanded increases. The marginal price–demand function is the 
derivative of the price–demand function and it tells us how fast the price changes at a given level of production. These 
functions are used in business to determine the price–elasticity of demand, and to help companies determine whether 
changing production levels would be profitable. 



518     5 • Integration

EXAMPLE 5.40 

Finding a Price–Demand Equation 
Find the price–demand equation for a particular brand of toothpaste at a supermarket chain when the demand is 50 
tubes per week at $2.35 per tube, given that the marginal price—demand function,  for x number of tubes per 
week, is given as 

If the supermarket chain sells 100 tubes per week, what price should it set? 

Solution 
To find the price–demand equation, integrate the marginal price–demand function. First find the antiderivative, then 
look at the particulars. Thus, 

Using substitution, let  and  Then, divide both sides of the du equation by −0.01. This gives 

The next step is to solve for C. We know that when the price is $2.35 per tube, the demand is 50 tubes per week. This 
means 

Now, just solve for C: 

Thus, 

If the supermarket sells 100 tubes of toothpaste per week, the price would be 

The supermarket should charge $1.99 per tube if it is selling 100 tubes per week. 

EXAMPLE 5.41 

Evaluating a Definite Integral Involving an Exponential Function 

Evaluate the definite integral 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.6 • Integrals Involving Exponential and Logarithmic Functions     519

Solution 
Again, substitution is the method to use. Let  so  or  Then  Next, 

change the limits of integration. Using the equation  we have 

The integral then becomes 

See Figure 5.38. 

Figure 5.38 The indicated area can be calculated by evaluating a definite integral using substitution. 

 5.34 Evaluate 

EXAMPLE 5.42 

Growth of Bacteria in a Culture 
Suppose the rate of growth of bacteria in a Petri dish is given by  where t is given in hours and  is given in 
thousands of bacteria per hour. If a culture starts with 10,000 bacteria, find a function  that gives the number of 
bacteria in the Petri dish at any time t. How many bacteria are in the dish after 2 hours? 

Solution 
We have 

Then, at  we have  so  and we get 

At time  we have 



520     5 • Integration

After 2 hours, there are 17,282 bacteria in the dish. 

 5.35 From Example 5.42, suppose the bacteria grow at a rate of  Assume the culture still starts with 
10,000 bacteria. Find  How many bacteria are in the dish after 3 hours? 

EXAMPLE 5.43 

Fruit Fly Population Growth 
Suppose a population of fruit flies increases at a rate of  in flies per day. If the initial population of fruit flies 
is 100 flies, how many flies are in the population after 10 days? 

Solution 
Let  represent the number of flies in the population at time t. Applying the net change theorem, we have 

There are 122 flies in the population after 10 days. 

 5.36 Suppose the rate of growth of the fly population is given by  and the initial fly population is 
100 flies. How many flies are in the population after 15 days? 

EXAMPLE 5.44 

Evaluating a Definite Integral Using Substitution 

Evaluate the definite integral using substitution: 

Solution 
This problem requires some rewriting to simplify applying the properties. First, rewrite the exponent on e as a power of 
x, then bring the x2 in the denominator up to the numerator using a negative exponent. We have 

Let  the exponent on e. Then 

Bringing the negative sign outside the integral sign, the problem now reads 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.6 • Integrals Involving Exponential and Logarithmic Functions     521

Next, change the limits of integration: 

Notice that now the limits begin with the larger number, meaning we must multiply by −1 and interchange the limits. 
Thus, 

 5.37 Evaluate the definite integral using substitution: 

Integrals Involving Logarithmic Functions 
Integrating functions of the form  result in the absolute value of the natural log function, as shown in the 
following rule. Integral formulas for other logarithmic functions, such as  and  are also included 
in the rule. 

Rule: Integration Formulas Involving Logarithmic Functions 

The following formulas can be used to evaluate integrals involving logarithmic functions. 

(5.22) 

EXAMPLE 5.45 

Finding an Antiderivative Involving 
Find the antiderivative of the function 

Solution 
First factor the 3 outside the integral symbol. Then use the u−1 rule. Thus, 



522     5 • Integration

See Figure 5.39. 

Figure 5.39 The domain of this function is 

 5.38 Find the antiderivative of 

EXAMPLE 5.46 

Finding an Antiderivative of a Rational Function 
Find the antiderivative of 

Solution 
This can be rewritten as  Use substitution. Let  then  Alter 

du by factoring out the 2. Thus, 

Rewrite the integrand in u: 

Then we have 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.6 • Integrals Involving Exponential and Logarithmic Functions     523

EXAMPLE 5.47 

Finding an Antiderivative of a Logarithmic Function 
Find the antiderivative of the log function 

Solution 
Follow the format in the formula listed in the rule on integration formulas involving logarithmic functions. Based on this 
format, we have 

 5.39 Find the antiderivative of 

Example 5.48 is a definite integral of a trigonometric function. With trigonometric functions, we often have to apply a 
trigonometric property or an identity before we can move forward. Finding the right form of the integrand is usually the 
key to a smooth integration. 

EXAMPLE 5.48 

Evaluating a Definite Integral 

Find the definite integral of 

Solution 
We need substitution to evaluate this problem. Let  so  Rewrite the integral in terms of u, 
changing the limits of integration as well. Thus, 

Then 

 SECTION 5.6 EXERCISES 
In the following exercises, compute each indefinite integral. 

320.  321 .  322 . 

323.  324 .  325 . 

326.  327 . 



524     5 • Integration

In the following exercises, find each indefinite integral by using appropriate substitutions. 

328.  329 .  330 . 

331.  332 .  333 . 

334.  335 .  336 . 

337.  338 .  339 . 

340.  341 . 

In the following exercises, verify by differentiation that  then use appropriate changes of 

variables to compute the integral. 

342.  343 .  344 . 

345.  346 . Write an integral to  347 . Write an integral to 
express the area under express the area under 
the graph of  from the graph of 

 to ex and evaluate between  and 
the integral.  and evaluate the 

integral. 

In the following exercises, use appropriate substitutions to express the trigonometric integrals in terms of compositions 
with logarithms. 

348.  349 .  350 . 

351.  352 .  353 . 

354. 

In the following exercises, evaluate the definite integral. 

355.  356 .  357 . 

358.  359 . 

In the following exercises, integrate using the indicated substitution. 

360.  361 .  362 . 

363.  364 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.6 • Integrals Involving Exponential and Logarithmic Functions     525

365. 

In the following exercises, does the right-endpoint approximation overestimate or underestimate the exact area? 
Calculate the right endpoint estimate R50 and solve for the exact area. 
366. [T]  over  367 . [T]  over  368 . [T]  over 

369. [T]  over  370 . [T]  over  371 . [T]  over 

In the following exercises,  for  Find the area under the graph of  between the given values a 
and b by integrating. 

372.  373 .  374 . 

375.  376 . Find the area under the  377 . Compute the integral of 
graph of the function  and find 

 between the smallest value of N 
 and such that the area under 

the graph 
between  and 

 is, at most, 
0.01. 

378. Find the limit, as N tends  379 . Show that  380 . Suppose that 
to infinity, of the area for all x and that f and g 
under the graph of  when are differentiable. Use the 

 between identity  and 
 and the chain rule to find the 

derivative of 
381. Use the previous exercise  382 . Show that if  then 

to find the antiderivative the integral of  from ac 
of to bc  is the 
and evaluate same as the integral of 

 from a to b. 

The following exercises are intended to derive the fundamental properties of the natural log starting from the definition 
 using properties of the definite integral and making no further assumptions. 

383. Use the identity  384 . Use a change of variable in  385 . Use the identity 
 to derive the integral  to  to show 

the identity show that that  is an increasing 
function of x on ∞
and use the previous 
exercises to show that the 
range of  is 
∞ ∞  Without any 

further assumptions, 
conclude that  has an 
inverse function defined 
on ∞ ∞



526     5 • Integration

386. Pretend, for the moment,  387 . Pretend, for the moment, 
that we do not know that that we do not know that 

 is the inverse function  is the inverse function 
of  but keep in mind of  but keep in mind 
that  has an inverse that  has an inverse 
function defined on function defined on 
∞ ∞  Call it E. Use ∞ ∞  Call it E. Show 

the identity that 
 to 

deduce that 
 for 

any real numbers a, b. 
388. The sine integral, defined as  389 . [T] The normal distribution 

 is an important quantity in probability is given by 

in engineering. Although it does not have a 
simple closed formula, it is possible to where σ is the standard 
estimate its behavior for large x. Show that deviation and μ is the 
for average. The standard 

normal distribution in 
probability, 
corresponds to 

 Compute 
the right endpoint 
estimates  of 

390. [T] Compute the right 
endpoint estimates 

 of 

5.7 Integrals Resulting in Inverse Trigonometric Functions 
Learning Objectives 

5.7.1 Integrate functions resulting in inverse trigonometric functions 
In this section we focus on integrals that result in inverse trigonometric functions. We have worked with these functions 
before. Recall from Functions and Graphs that trigonometric functions are not one-to-one unless the domains are 
restricted. When working with inverses of trigonometric functions, we always need to be careful to take these 
restrictions into account. Also in Derivatives, we developed formulas for derivatives of inverse trigonometric functions. 
The formulas developed there give rise directly to integration formulas involving inverse trigonometric functions. 

Integrals that Result in Inverse Sine Functions 
Let us begin this last section of the chapter with the three formulas. Along with these formulas, we use substitution to 
evaluate the integrals. We prove the formula for the inverse sine integral. 

Rule: Integration Formulas Resulting in Inverse Trigonometric Functions 

The following integration formulas yield inverse trigonometric functions. Assume : 

1. 

(5.23) 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.7 • Integrals Resulting in Inverse Trigonometric Functions     527

2. 
(5.24) 

3. 

(5.25) 

Proof 
Let  Then  Now let’s use implicit differentiation. We obtain 

For  Thus, applying the Pythagorean identity  we have  This 
gives 

Then for  and generalizing to u, we have 

□ 

EXAMPLE 5.49 

Evaluating a Definite Integral Using Inverse Trigonometric Functions 

Evaluate the definite integral 

Solution 
We can go directly to the formula for the antiderivative in the rule on integration formulas resulting in inverse 
trigonometric functions, and then evaluate the definite integral. We have 



528     5 • Integration

 5.40 Evaluate the integral 

EXAMPLE 5.50 

Finding an Antiderivative Involving an Inverse Trigonometric Function 

Evaluate the integral 

Solution 
Substitute  Then  and we have 

Applying the formula with  we obtain 

 5.41 Find the indefinite integral using an inverse trigonometric function and substitution for 

EXAMPLE 5.51 

Evaluating a Definite Integral 

Evaluate the definite integral 

Solution 
The format of the problem matches the inverse sine formula. Thus, 

Integrals Resulting in Other Inverse Trigonometric Functions 
There are six inverse trigonometric functions. However, only three integration formulas are noted in the rule on 
integration formulas resulting in inverse trigonometric functions because the remaining three are negative versions of 
the ones we use. The only difference is whether the integrand is positive or negative. Rather than memorizing three 
more formulas, if the integrand is negative, simply factor out −1 and evaluate the integral using one of the formulas 
already provided. To close this section, we examine one more formula: the integral resulting in the inverse tangent 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.7 • Integrals Resulting in Inverse Trigonometric Functions     529

function. 

EXAMPLE 5.52 

Finding an Antiderivative Involving the Inverse Tangent Function 
Evaluate the integral 

Solution 
Comparing this problem with the formulas stated in the rule on integration formulas resulting in inverse trigonometric 
functions, the integrand looks similar to the formula for  So we use substitution, letting  then 

 and  Then, we have 

 5.42 Use substitution to find the antiderivative 

EXAMPLE 5.53 

Applying the Integration Formulas 
Evaluate the integral 

Solution 
Apply the formula with  Then, 

 5.43 Evaluate the integral 

EXAMPLE 5.54 

Evaluating a Definite Integral 

Evaluate the definite integral 

Solution 
Use the formula for the inverse tangent. We have 

 5.44 Evaluate the definite integral 



530     5 • Integration

 SECTION 5.7 EXERCISES 
In the following exercises, evaluate each integral in terms of an inverse trigonometric function. 

391.  392 .  393 . 

394.  395 .  396 . 

In the following exercises, find each indefinite integral, using appropriate substitutions. 

397.  398 .  399 . 

400.  401 .  402 . 

403. Explain the relationship  404 . Explain the relationship 

Is it true, in general, that Is it true, in general, that 

405. Explain what is wrong  406 . Explain what is wrong 
with the following with the following 

integral: integral: 

In the following exercises, solve for the antiderivative  of f with  then use a calculator to graph f and the 

antiderivative over the given interval  Identify a value of C such that adding C to the antiderivative recovers the 
definite integral 

407. [T]  over  408 . [T]  over  409 . [T]  over 

410. [T]  over 

In the following exercises, compute the antiderivative using appropriate substitutions. 

411.  412 .  413 . 

414.  415 .  416 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.7 • Integrals Resulting in Inverse Trigonometric Functions     531

In the following exercises, use a calculator to graph the antiderivative  with  over the given interval 

Approximate a value of C, if possible, such that adding C to the antiderivative gives the same value as the definite 
integral 

417. [T]  over  418 . [T]  over  419 . [T] 

over 

420. [T]  over  421 . [T]  over  422 . [T]  over 

In the following exercises, compute each integral using appropriate substitutions. 

423.  424 .  425 . 

426.  427 .  428 . 

In the following exercises, compute each definite integral. 

429.  430 .  431 . 

432.  433 . For  compute  434 . For ∞  compute 

 and 
 and 

evaluate  the 
evaluate  the 

area under the graph of ∞
 on area under the graph of 

 over ∞

435. Use the substitution  436 . [T] Approximate the  437 . [T] Approximate the 
 and the points at which the points at which the 

identity graphs of graphs of 
 to and and 

evaluate intersect to four decimal 
intersect to four decimal places, and approximate 

(Hint: Multiply the top and places, and approximate the area between their 
bottom of the integrand the area between their graphs to three decimal 
by graphs to three decimal places. 

places. 



532     5 • Integration

438. Use the following graph to prove that 

Access for free at openstax.org



5 • Chapter Review     533

Chapter Review 
Key Terms 
average value of a function  (or fave) the average value of a function on an interval can be found by calculating the 

definite integral of the function and dividing that value by the length of the interval 
change of variables  the substitution of a variable, such as u, for an expression in the integrand 
definite integral  a primary operation of calculus; the area between the curve and the x-axis over a given interval is a 

definite integral 
fundamental theorem of calculus  the theorem, central to the entire development of calculus, that establishes the 

relationship between differentiation and integration 
fundamental theorem of calculus, part 1  uses a definite integral to define an antiderivative of a function 
fundamental theorem of calculus, part 2  (also, evaluation theorem) we can evaluate a definite integral by 

evaluating the antiderivative of the integrand at the endpoints of the interval and subtracting 
integrable function  a function is integrable if the limit defining the integral exists; in other words, if the limit of the 

Riemann sums as n goes to infinity exists 
integrand  the function to the right of the integration symbol; the integrand includes the function being integrated 
integration by substitution  a technique for integration that allows integration of functions that are the result of a 

chain-rule derivative 
left-endpoint approximation  an approximation of the area under a curve computed by using the left endpoint of each 

subinterval to calculate the height of the vertical sides of each rectangle 
limits of integration  these values appear near the top and bottom of the integral sign and define the interval over 

which the function should be integrated 
lower sum  a sum obtained by using the minimum value of  on each subinterval 
mean value theorem for integrals  guarantees that a point c exists such that  is equal to the average value of the 

function 
net change theorem  if we know the rate of change of a quantity, the net change theorem says the future quantity is 

equal to the initial quantity plus the integral of the rate of change of the quantity 
net signed area  the area between a function and the x-axis such that the area below the x-axis is subtracted from the 

area above the x-axis; the result is the same as the definite integral of the function 
partition  a set of points that divides an interval into subintervals 
regular partition  a partition in which the subintervals all have the same width 

riemann sum  an estimate of the area under the curve of the form 

right-endpoint approximation  the right-endpoint approximation is an approximation of the area of the rectangles 
under a curve using the right endpoint of each subinterval to construct the vertical sides of each rectangle 

sigma notation  (also, summation notation) the Greek letter sigma (Σ) indicates addition of the values; the values of 
the index above and below the sigma indicate where to begin the summation and where to end it 

total area  total area between a function and the x-axis is calculated by adding the area above the x-axis and the area 
below the x-axis; the result is the same as the definite integral of the absolute value of the function 

upper sum  a sum obtained by using the maximum value of  on each subinterval 
variable of integration  indicates which variable you are integrating with respect to; if it is x, then the function in the 

integrand is followed by dx 



534     5 • Chapter Review

Key Equations 

Properties of Sigma Notation 

Sums and Powers of Integers 

Left-Endpoint Approximation 

Right-Endpoint Approximation 

Definite Integral 
∞

Properties of the Definite Integral 

 for constant c 

Access for free at openstax.org



5 • Chapter Review     535

If  is continuous over an interval  then there is at least one point 
Mean Value Theorem for 
Integrals  such that 

If  is continuous over an interval  and the function  is defined by 
Fundamental Theorem of 
Calculus Part 1  then 

If f is continuous over the interval  and  is any antiderivative of  then 
Fundamental Theorem of 
Calculus Part 2 

Net Change Theorem  or 

Substitution with Indefinite Integrals 

Substitution with Definite Integrals 

Integrals of Exponential Functions 

Integration Formulas Involving Logarithmic Functions 

Integrals That Produce Inverse Trigonometric Functions 

Key Concepts 
5.1 Approximating Areas 

• The use of sigma (summation) notation of the form  is useful for expressing long sums of values in compact 

form. 
• For a continuous function defined over an interval  the process of dividing the interval into n equal parts, 

extending a rectangle to the graph of the function, calculating the areas of the series of rectangles, and then 
summing the areas yields an approximation of the area of that region. 

• The width of each rectangle is 

• Riemann sums are expressions of the form  and can be used to estimate the area under the curve 



536     5 • Chapter Review

 Left- and right-endpoint approximations are special kinds of Riemann sums where the values of  are 
chosen to be the left or right endpoints of the subintervals, respectively. 

• Riemann sums allow for much flexibility in choosing the set of points  at which the function is evaluated, often 
with an eye to obtaining a lower sum or an upper sum. 

5.2 The Definite Integral 
• The definite integral can be used to calculate net signed area, which is the area above the x-axis less the area below 

the x-axis. Net signed area can be positive, negative, or zero. 
• The component parts of the definite integral are the integrand, the variable of integration, and the limits of 

integration. 
• Continuous functions on a closed interval are integrable. Functions that are not continuous may still be integrable, 

depending on the nature of the discontinuities. 
• The properties of definite integrals can be used to evaluate integrals. 
• The area under the curve of many functions can be calculated using geometric formulas. 
• The average value of a function can be calculated using definite integrals. 

5.3 The Fundamental Theorem of Calculus 
• The Mean Value Theorem for Integrals states that for a continuous function over a closed interval, there is a value c 

such that  equals the average value of the function. See The Mean Value Theorem for Integrals. 
• The Fundamental Theorem of Calculus, Part 1 shows the relationship between the derivative and the integral. See 

Fundamental Theorem of Calculus, Part 1. 
• The Fundamental Theorem of Calculus, Part 2 is a formula for evaluating a definite integral in terms of an 

antiderivative of its integrand. The total area under a curve can be found using this formula. See The Fundamental 
Theorem of Calculus, Part 2. 

5.4 Integration Formulas and the Net Change Theorem 
• The net change theorem states that when a quantity changes, the final value equals the initial value plus the 

integral of the rate of change. Net change can be a positive number, a negative number, or zero. 
• The area under an even function over a symmetric interval can be calculated by doubling the area over the positive 

x-axis. For an odd function, the integral over a symmetric interval equals zero, because half the area is negative. 

5.5 Substitution 
• Substitution is a technique that simplifies the integration of functions that are the result of a chain-rule derivative. 

The term ‘substitution’ refers to changing variables or substituting the variable u and du for appropriate expressions 
in the integrand. 

• When using substitution for a definite integral, we also have to change the limits of integration. 

5.6 Integrals Involving Exponential and Logarithmic Functions 
• Exponential and logarithmic functions arise in many real-world applications, especially those involving growth and 

decay. 
• Substitution is often used to evaluate integrals involving exponential functions or logarithms. 

5.7 Integrals Resulting in Inverse Trigonometric Functions 
• Formulas for derivatives of inverse trigonometric functions developed in Derivatives of Exponential and Logarithmic 

Functions lead directly to integration formulas involving inverse trigonometric functions. 
• Use the formulas listed in the rule on integration formulas resulting in inverse trigonometric functions to match up 

the correct format and make alterations as necessary to solve the problem. 
• Substitution is often required to put the integrand in the correct form. 

Access for free at openstax.org



5 • Chapter Review     537

Review Exercises 
True or False. Justify your answer with a proof or a counterexample. Assume all functions  and  are continuous over 
their domains. 

439. If  for  440 .  441 . If  for all 
all  then the right-hand  then 
rule underestimates the 

integral  Use a 

graph to justify your 
answer. 

442. All continuous functions 
have an antiderivative. 

Evaluate the Riemann sums  for the following functions over the specified interval. Compare your answer with 
the exact answer, when possible, or use a calculator to determine the answer. 

443.  over  444 .  over  445 .  over 

446.  over 

Evaluate the following integrals. 

447.  448 .  449 . 

450. 

Find the antiderivative. 

451.  452 .  453 . 

454. 

Find the derivative. 

455.  456 .  457 . 

458. 

The following problems consider the historic average cost per gigabyte of RAM on a computer. 

Year 5-Year Change ($) 

1980 0 

1985 −5,468,750 

1990 −755,495 



538     5 • Chapter Review

Year 5-Year Change ($) 

1995 −73,005 

2000 −29,768 

2005 −918 

2010 −177 

459. If the average cost per  460 . The average cost per  461 . Find the average cost of 
gigabyte of RAM in 2010 gigabyte of RAM can be 1GB RAM for 2005 to 
is $12, find the average approximated by the 2010. 
cost per gigabyte of RAM function 
in 1980. 

where  is measured in 
years since 1980, and  is 
cost in US$. Find the 
average cost per gigabyte 
of RAM for 1980 to 2010. 

462. The velocity of a bullet from a  463 . What is the average 
rifle can be approximated by velocity of the bullet for 

the first half-second? 
where  is seconds after the 
shot and  is the velocity 
measured in feet per second. 
This equation only models the 
velocity for the first half-
second after the shot: 

 What is the total 
distance the bullet travels in 
0.5 sec? 

Access for free at openstax.org



6 • Introduction          539

6 APPLICATIONS OF INTEGRATION 

Figure 6.1 Hoover Dam is one of the United States’ iconic landmarks, and provides irrigation and hydroelectric power for 
millions of people in the southwest United States. (credit: modification of work by Lynn Betts, Wikimedia) 

Chapter Outline 
6.1 Areas between Curves 
6.2 Determining Volumes by Slicing 
6.3 Volumes of Revolution: Cylindrical Shells 
6.4 Arc Length of a Curve and Surface Area 
6.5 Physical Applications 
6.6 Moments and Centers of Mass 
6.7 Integrals, Exponential Functions, and Logarithms 
6.8 Exponential Growth and Decay 
6.9 Calculus of the Hyperbolic Functions 

Introduction 
The Hoover Dam is an engineering marvel. When Lake Mead, the reservoir behind the dam, is full, the dam withstands a 
great deal of force. However, water levels in the lake vary considerably as a result of droughts and varying water 
demands. Later in this chapter, we use definite integrals to calculate the force exerted on the dam when the reservoir is 
full and we examine how changing water levels affect that force (see Example 6.28). 
Hydrostatic force is only one of the many applications of definite integrals we explore in this chapter. From geometric 
applications such as surface area and volume, to physical applications such as mass and work, to growth and decay 
models, definite integrals are a powerful tool to help us understand and model the world around us. 



540     6 • Applications of Integration

6.1 Areas between Curves 
Learning Objectives 

6.1.1 Determine the area of a region between two curves by integrating with respect to the independent 
variable. 

6.1.2 Find the area of a compound region. 
6.1.3 Determine the area of a region between two curves by integrating with respect to the dependent 

variable. 
In Introduction to Integration, we developed the concept of the definite integral to calculate the area below a curve on a 
given interval. In this section, we expand that idea to calculate the area of more complex regions. We start by finding the 
area between two curves that are functions of  beginning with the simple case in which one function value is always 
greater than the other. We then look at cases when the graphs of the functions cross. Last, we consider how to calculate 
the area between two curves that are functions of 

Area of a Region between Two Curves 
Let  and  be continuous functions over an interval  such that  on  We want to find the 
area between the graphs of the functions, as shown in the following figure. 

Figure 6.2 The area between the graphs of two functions,  and  on the interval 
As we did before, we are going to partition the interval on the  and approximate the area between the graphs of 
the functions with rectangles. So, for  let  be a regular partition of  Then, for 
choose a point  and on each interval  construct a rectangle that extends vertically from 
to  Figure 6.3(a) shows the rectangles when  is selected to be the left endpoint of the interval and  Figure 
6.3(b) shows a representative rectangle in detail. 

 MEDIA 

Use this calculator (http://www.openstax.org/l/20_CurveCalc) to learn more about the areas between two curves. 

Figure 6.3 (a)We can approximate the area between the graphs of two functions,  and  with rectangles. (b) The 
area of a typical rectangle goes from one curve to the other. 
The height of each individual rectangle is  and the width of each rectangle is  Adding the areas of all 
the rectangles, we see that the area between the curves is approximated by 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.1 • Areas between Curves     541

This is a Riemann sum, so we take the limit as ∞  and we get 

∞

These findings are summarized in the following theorem. 

Theorem 6.1 

Finding the Area between Two Curves 
Let  and  be continuous functions such that  over an interval  Let  denote the region 
bounded above by the graph of  below by the graph of  and on the left and right by the lines  and 

 respectively. Then, the area of  is given by 

(6.1) 

We apply this theorem in the following example. 

EXAMPLE 6.1 

Finding the Area of a Region between Two Curves 1 
If R is the region bounded above by the graph of the function  and below by the graph of the function 

 over the interval  find the area of region 

Solution 
The region is depicted in the following figure. 

Figure 6.4 A region between two curves is shown where one curve is always greater than the other. 
We have 



542     6 • Applications of Integration

The area of the region is 

 6.1 If  is the region bounded by the graphs of the functions  and  over the interval 
 find the area of region 

In Example 6.1, we defined the interval of interest as part of the problem statement. Quite often, though, we want to 
define our interval of interest based on where the graphs of the two functions intersect. This is illustrated in the 
following example. 

EXAMPLE 6.2 

Finding the Area of a Region between Two Curves 2 
If  is the region bounded above by the graph of the function  and below by the graph of the function 

 find the area of region 

Solution 
The region is depicted in the following figure. 

Figure 6.5 This graph shows the region below the graph of  and above the graph of 
We first need to compute where the graphs of the functions intersect. Setting  we get 

The graphs of the functions intersect when  or  so we want to integrate from  to  Since  for 
 we obtain 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.1 • Areas between Curves     543

The area of the region is  units2. 

 6.2 If R is the region bounded above by the graph of the function  and below by the graph of the 
function  find the area of region 

Areas of Compound Regions 
So far, we have required  over the entire interval of interest, but what if we want to look at regions bounded 
by the graphs of functions that cross one another? In that case, we modify the process we just developed by using the 
absolute value function. 

Theorem 6.2 

Finding the Area of a Region between Curves That Cross 
Let  and  be continuous functions over an interval  Let  denote the region between the graphs of 
and  and be bounded on the left and right by the lines  and  respectively. Then, the area of  is given 
by 

In practice, applying this theorem requires us to break up the interval  and evaluate several integrals, depending on 
which of the function values is greater over a given part of the interval. We study this process in the following example. 

EXAMPLE 6.3 

Finding the Area of a Region Bounded by Functions That Cross 
If R is the region between the graphs of the functions  and  over the interval  find the area 
of region 

Solution 
The region is depicted in the following figure. 



544     6 • Applications of Integration

Figure 6.6 The region between two curves can be broken into two sub-regions. 
The graphs of the functions intersect at  For   so 

On the other hand, for   so 

Then 

The area of the region is  units2. 

 6.3 If R is the region between the graphs of the functions  and  over the interval 
 find the area of region 

EXAMPLE 6.4 

Finding the Area of a Complex Region 
Consider the region depicted in Figure 6.7. Find the area of 

Figure 6.7 Two integrals are required to calculate the area of this region. 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.1 • Areas between Curves     545

Solution 
As with Example 6.3, we need to divide the interval into two pieces. The graphs of the functions intersect at  (set 

 and solve for x), so we evaluate two separate integrals: one over the interval  and one over the interval 

Over the interval  the region is bounded above by  and below by the x-axis, so we have 

Over the interval  the region is bounded above by  and below by the  so we have 

Adding these areas together, we obtain 

The area of the region is  units2. 

 6.4 Consider the region depicted in the following figure. Find the area of 

Regions Defined with Respect to y 
In Example 6.4, we had to evaluate two separate integrals to calculate the area of the region. However, there is another 
approach that requires only one integral. What if we treat the curves as functions of  instead of as functions of 
Review Figure 6.7. Note that the left graph, shown in red, is represented by the function  We could just as 
easily solve this for  and represent the curve by the function  (Note that  is also a valid 
representation of the function  as a function of  However, based on the graph, it is clear we are 
interested in the positive square root.) Similarly, the right graph is represented by the function  but 
could just as easily be represented by the function  When the graphs are represented as functions of 
we see the region is bounded on the left by the graph of one function and on the right by the graph of the other 
function. Therefore, if we integrate with respect to  we need to evaluate one integral only. Let’s develop a formula for 
this type of integration. 
Let  and  be continuous functions over an interval  such that  for all  We want to find 
the area between the graphs of the functions, as shown in the following figure. 



546     6 • Applications of Integration

Figure 6.8 We can find the area between the graphs of two functions,  and 
This time, we are going to partition the interval on the  and use horizontal rectangles to approximate the area 
between the functions. So, for  let  be a regular partition of  Then, for 
choose a point  then over each interval  construct a rectangle that extends horizontally from 

 to  Figure 6.9(a) shows the rectangles when  is selected to be the lower endpoint of the interval and 
 Figure 6.9(b) shows a representative rectangle in detail. 

Figure 6.9 (a) Approximating the area between the graphs of two functions,  and  with rectangles. (b) The area 
of a typical rectangle. 
The height of each individual rectangle is  and the width of each rectangle is  Therefore, the area 
between the curves is approximately 

This is a Riemann sum, so we take the limit as ∞  obtaining 

∞

These findings are summarized in the following theorem. 

Theorem 6.3 

Finding the Area between Two Curves, Integrating along the y-axis 
Let  and  be continuous functions such that  for all  Let  denote the region bounded on 
the right by the graph of  on the left by the graph of  and above and below by the lines  and 
respectively. Then, the area of  is given by 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.1 • Areas between Curves     547

(6.2) 

EXAMPLE 6.5 

Integrating with Respect to y 
Let’s revisit Example 6.4, only this time let’s integrate with respect to  Let  be the region depicted in Figure 6.10. Find 
the area of  by integrating with respect to 

Figure 6.10 The area of region  can be calculated using one integral only when the curves are treated as functions of 

Solution 
We must first express the graphs as functions of  As we saw at the beginning of this section, the curve on the left can 
be represented by the function  and the curve on the right can be represented by the function 

Now we have to determine the limits of integration. The region is bounded below by the x-axis, so the lower limit of 
integration is  The upper limit of integration is determined by the point where the two graphs intersect, which is 
the point  so the upper limit of integration is  Thus, we have 
Calculating the area of the region, we get 

The area of the region is  units2. 

 6.5 Let’s revisit the checkpoint associated with Example 6.4, only this time, let’s integrate with respect to  Let 
 be the region depicted in the following figure. Find the area of  by integrating with respect to 



548     6 • Applications of Integration

 SECTION 6.1 EXERCISES 
For the following exercises, determine the area of the region between the two curves in the given figure by integrating 
over the 

1 .  2 . 

For the following exercises, split the region between the two curves into two smaller regions, then determine the area by 
integrating over the  Note that you will have two integrals to solve. 

3 .  and  4 .  and  for 

For the following exercises, determine the area of the region between the two curves by integrating over the 

5 .  6 . 

For the following exercises, graph the equations and shade the area of the region between the curves. Determine its 
area by integrating over the 

7 .  8 .  9 .  and  on 

10 .  11 .  12 . 

13 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.1 • Areas between Curves     549

For the following exercises, graph the equations and shade the area of the region between the curves. If necessary, 
break the region into sub-regions to determine its entire area. 

14 .  15 .  16 .  and 
over 

17 .  18 .  19 .  and 
over over 

For the following exercises, graph the equations and shade the area of the region between the curves. Determine its 
area by integrating over the 

20 .  21 .  22 . 

23 .  24 . 
25 . 

For the following exercises, graph the equations and shade the area of the region between the curves. Determine its 
area by integrating over the x-axis or y-axis, whichever seems more convenient. 

26 .  27 .  28 . 

29 .  30 .  31 . 

32 .  33 . 

34 .  35 . 

36 .  37 . 

For the following exercises, find the exact area of the region bounded by the given equations if possible. If you are 
unable to determine the intersection points analytically, use a calculator to approximate the intersection points with 
three decimal places and determine the approximate area of the region. 
38 . [T]  39 . [T]  40 . [T] 

41 . [T]  42 . [T] 

43 . [T]  44 . [T] 

45 . [T]  46 . [T] 



550     6 • Applications of Integration

47 . [T]  48 . The largest triangle with a base  49 . A factory selling cell 
on the  that fits inside the phones has a marginal cost 
upper half of the unit circle function 

 is given by 
 and  See where  represents the 

the following figure. What is the number of cell phones,  is 
area inside the semicircle but the marginal cost, in 
outside the triangle? dollars, of selling  phones, 

and a marginal revenue 
function given by 

, where 
is the revenue, in dollars, 
earned by selling  cell 
phonesFind the area 
between the graphs of 
these curves and 
What does this area 
represent? 

50 . An amusement park has a  51 . The tortoise versus the  52 . The tortoise versus the hare: 
marginal cost function hare: The speed of the hare The speed of the hare is 

is given by the sinusoidal given by the sinusoidal 
where  represents the function function 
number of tickets sold, and 
a marginal revenue whereas the speed of the whereas the speed of the 
function given by tortoise is tortoise is  where 

 Find the where  is time measured is time measured in hours 
total profit generated in hours and the speed is and speed is measured in 
when selling  tickets. measured in miles per kilometers per hour. If the 
Use a calculator to hour. Find the area race is over in  hour, who 
determine intersection between the curves from won the race and by how 
points, if necessary, to two time  to the first time much? Use a calculator to 
decimal places. after one hour when the determine the intersection 

tortoise and hare are points, if necessary, accurate 
traveling at the same to three decimal places. 
speed. What does it 
represent? Use a calculator 
to determine the 
intersection points, if 
necessary, accurate to 
three decimal places. 

For the following exercises, find the area between the curves by integrating with respect to  and then with respect to 
Is one method easier than the other? Do you obtain the same answer? 

53 .  54 .  55 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.2 • Determining Volumes by Slicing     551

For the following exercises, solve using calculus, then check your answer with geometry. 
56 . Determine the equations for the  57 . Find the area between the 

sides of the square that touches perimeter of the unit circle and 
the unit circle on all four sides, the triangle created from 
as seen in the following figure.  and 
Find the area between the  as seen in the following 
perimeter of this square and the figure. Is there a way to solve 
unit circle. Is there another way this without using calculus? 
to solve this without using 
calculus? 

6.2 Determining Volumes by Slicing 
Learning Objectives 

6.2.1 Determine the volume of a solid by integrating a cross-section (the slicing method). 
6.2.2 Find the volume of a solid of revolution using the disk method. 
6.2.3 Find the volume of a solid of revolution with a cavity using the washer method. 

In the preceding section, we used definite integrals to find the area between two curves. In this section, we use definite 
integrals to find volumes of three-dimensional solids. We consider three approaches—slicing, disks, and washers—for 
finding these volumes, depending on the characteristics of the solid. 

Volume and the Slicing Method 
Just as area is the numerical measure of a two-dimensional region, volume is the numerical measure of a three-
dimensional solid. Most of us have computed volumes of solids by using basic geometric formulas. The volume of a 
rectangular solid, for example, can be computed by multiplying length, width, and height:  The formulas for the 
volume of a sphere  a cone  and a pyramid  have also been introduced. 
Although some of these formulas were derived using geometry alone, all these formulas can be obtained by using 
integration. 
We can also calculate the volume of a cylinder. Although most of us think of a cylinder as having a circular base, such as a 
soup can or a metal rod, in mathematics the word cylinder has a more general meaning. To discuss cylinders in this 
more general context, we first need to define some vocabulary. 
We define the cross-section of a solid to be the intersection of a plane with the solid. A cylinder is defined as any solid 
that can be generated by translating a plane region along a line perpendicular to the region, called the axis of the 
cylinder. Thus, all cross-sections perpendicular to the axis of a cylinder are identical. The solid shown in Figure 6.11 is an 
example of a cylinder with a noncircular base. To calculate the volume of a cylinder, then, we simply multiply the area of 
the cross-section by the height of the cylinder:  In the case of a right circular cylinder (soup can), this becomes 



552     6 • Applications of Integration

Figure 6.11 Each cross-section of a particular cylinder is identical to the others. 
If a solid does not have a constant cross-section (and it is not one of the other basic solids), we may not have a formula 
for its volume. In this case, we can use a definite integral to calculate the volume of the solid. We do this by slicing the 
solid into pieces, estimating the volume of each slice, and then adding those estimated volumes together. The slices 
should all be parallel to one another, and when we put all the slices together, we should get the whole solid. Consider, for 
example, the solid S shown in Figure 6.12, extending along the 

Figure 6.12 A solid with a varying cross-section. 
We want to divide  into slices perpendicular to the  As we see later in the chapter, there may be times when we 
want to slice the solid in some other direction—say, with slices perpendicular to the y-axis. The decision of which way to 
slice the solid is very important. If we make the wrong choice, the computations can get quite messy. Later in the 
chapter, we examine some of these situations in detail and look at how to decide which way to slice the solid. For the 
purposes of this section, however, we use slices perpendicular to the 
Because the cross-sectional area is not constant, we let  represent the area of the cross-section at point  Now let 

 be a regular partition of  and for  let  represent the slice of  stretching from 
 The following figure shows the sliced solid with 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.2 • Determining Volumes by Slicing     553

Figure 6.13 The solid  has been divided into three slices perpendicular to the 
Finally, for  let  be an arbitrary point in  Then the volume of slice  can be estimated by 

 Adding these approximations together, we see the volume of the entire solid  can be 
approximated by 

By now, we can recognize this as a Riemann sum, and our next step is to take the limit as ∞  Then we have 

∞

The technique we have just described is called the slicing method. To apply it, we use the following strategy. 

Problem-Solving Strategy 

Finding Volumes by the Slicing Method 
1. Examine the solid and determine the shape of a cross-section of the solid. It is often helpful to draw a picture if 

one is not provided. 
2. Determine a formula for the area of the cross-section. 
3. Integrate the area formula over the appropriate interval to get the volume. 

Recall that in this section, we assume the slices are perpendicular to the  Therefore, the area formula is in terms of 
x and the limits of integration lie on the  However, the problem-solving strategy shown here is valid regardless of 
how we choose to slice the solid. 

EXAMPLE 6.6 

Deriving the Formula for the Volume of a Pyramid 
We know from geometry that the formula for the volume of a pyramid is  If the pyramid has a square base, 
this becomes  where  denotes the length of one side of the base. We are going to use the slicing method to 
derive this formula. 

Solution 
We want to apply the slicing method to a pyramid with a square base. To set up the integral, consider the pyramid shown 
in Figure 6.14, oriented along the 



554     6 • Applications of Integration

Figure 6.14 (a) A pyramid with a square base is oriented along the x-axis. (b) A two-dimensional view of the pyramid is 
seen from the side. 
We first want to determine the shape of a cross-section of the pyramid. We know the base is a square, so the cross-
sections are squares as well (step 1). Now we want to determine a formula for the area of one of these cross-sectional 
squares. Looking at Figure 6.14(b), and using a proportion, since these are similar triangles, we have 

Therefore, the area of one of the cross-sectional squares is 

Then we find the volume of the pyramid by integrating from  (step 

This is the formula we were looking for. 

 6.6 Use the slicing method to derive the formula  for the volume of a circular cone. 

Solids of Revolution 
If a region in a plane is revolved around a line in that plane, the resulting solid is called a solid of revolution, as shown in 
the following figure. 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.2 • Determining Volumes by Slicing     555

Figure 6.15 (a) This is the region that is revolved around the x-axis. (b) As the region begins to revolve around the axis, it 
sweeps out a solid of revolution. (c) This is the solid that results when the revolution is complete. 
Solids of revolution are common in mechanical applications, such as machine parts produced by a lathe. We spend the 
rest of this section looking at solids of this type. The next example uses the slicing method to calculate the volume of a 
solid of revolution. 

 MEDIA 

Use an online integral calculator (http://www.openstax.org/l/20_IntCalc2) to learn more. 



556     6 • Applications of Integration

EXAMPLE 6.7 

Using the Slicing Method to find the Volume of a Solid of Revolution 
Use the slicing method to find the volume of the solid of revolution bounded by the graphs of 

 and rotated about the 

Solution 
Using the problem-solving strategy, we first sketch the graph of the quadratic function over the interval  as shown 
in the following figure. 

Figure 6.16 A region used to produce a solid of revolution. 
Next, revolve the region around the x-axis, as shown in the following figure. 

Figure 6.17 Two views, (a) and (b), of the solid of revolution produced by revolving the region in Figure 6.16 about the 

Since the solid was formed by revolving the region around the  the cross-sections are circles (step 1). The area of 
the cross-section, then, is the area of a circle, and the radius of the circle is given by  Use the formula for the area 
of the circle: 

The volume, then, is (step 3) 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.2 • Determining Volumes by Slicing     557

The volume is 

 6.7 Use the method of slicing to find the volume of the solid of revolution formed by revolving the region 
between the graph of the function  and the  over the interval  around the  See 
the following figure. 

The Disk Method 
When we use the slicing method with solids of revolution, it is often called the disk method because, for solids of 
revolution, the slices used to over approximate the volume of the solid are disks. To see this, consider the solid of 
revolution generated by revolving the region between the graph of the function  and the  over 
the interval  around the  The graph of the function and a representative disk are shown in Figure 6.18(a) 
and (b). The region of revolution and the resulting solid are shown in Figure 6.18(c) and (d). 



558     6 • Applications of Integration

Figure 6.18 (a) A thin rectangle for approximating the area under a curve. (b) A representative disk formed by revolving 
the rectangle about the  (c) The region under the curve is revolved about the  resulting in (d) the solid of 
revolution. 
We already used the formal Riemann sum development of the volume formula when we developed the slicing method. 
We know that 

The only difference with the disk method is that we know the formula for the cross-sectional area ahead of time; it is the 
area of a circle. This gives the following rule. 

Rule: The Disk Method 

Let  be continuous and nonnegative. Define  as the region bounded above by the graph of  below by the 
 on the left by the line  and on the right by the line  Then, the volume of the solid of revolution 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.2 • Determining Volumes by Slicing     559

formed by revolving  around the  is given by 

(6.3) 

The volume of the solid we have been studying (Figure 6.18) is given by 

Let’s look at some examples. 

EXAMPLE 6.8 

Using the Disk Method to Find the Volume of a Solid of Revolution 1 
Use the disk method to find the volume of the solid of revolution generated by rotating the region between the graph of 

 and the  over the interval  around the 

Solution 
The graphs of the function and the solid of revolution are shown in the following figure. 

Figure 6.19 (a) The function  over the interval  (b) The solid of revolution obtained by revolving the 
region under the graph of  about the 
We have 

The volume is  units3. 

 6.8 Use the disk method to find the volume of the solid of revolution generated by rotating the region between 
the graph of  and the  over the interval  around the 



560     6 • Applications of Integration

So far, our examples have all concerned regions revolved around the  but we can generate a solid of revolution by 
revolving a plane region around any horizontal or vertical line. In the next example, we look at a solid of revolution that 
has been generated by revolving a region around the  The mechanics of the disk method are nearly the same as 
when the  is the axis of revolution, but we express the function in terms of  and we integrate with respect to y as 
well. This is summarized in the following rule. 

Rule: The Disk Method for Solids of Revolution around the y-axis 

Let  be continuous and nonnegative. Define  as the region bounded on the right by the graph of  on the 
left by the  below by the line  and above by the line  Then, the volume of the solid of revolution 
formed by revolving  around the  is given by 

(6.4) 

The next example shows how this rule works in practice. 

EXAMPLE 6.9 

Using the Disk Method to Find the Volume of a Solid of Revolution 2 
Let  be the region bounded by the graph of  and the  over the  interval  Use the disk 
method to find the volume of the solid of revolution generated by rotating  around the 

Solution 
Figure 6.20 shows the function and a representative disk that can be used to estimate the volume. Notice that since we 
are revolving the function around the  the disks are horizontal, rather than vertical. 

Figure 6.20 (a) Shown is a thin rectangle between the curve of the function  and the  (b) The 
rectangle forms a representative disk after revolution around the 
The region to be revolved and the full solid of revolution are depicted in the following figure. 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.2 • Determining Volumes by Slicing     561

Figure 6.21 (a) The region to the left of the function  over the  interval  (b) The solid of 
revolution formed by revolving the region about the 
To find the volume, we integrate with respect to  We obtain 

The volume is  units3. 

 6.9 Use the disk method to find the volume of the solid of revolution generated by rotating the region between 
the graph of  and the  over the interval  around the 

The Washer Method 
Some solids of revolution have cavities in the middle; they are not solid all the way to the axis of revolution. Sometimes, 
this is just a result of the way the region of revolution is shaped with respect to the axis of revolution. In other cases, 
cavities arise when the region of revolution is defined as the region between the graphs of two functions. A third way 
this can happen is when an axis of revolution other than the  or  is selected. 
When the solid of revolution has a cavity in the middle, the slices used to approximate the volume are not disks, but 
washers (disks with holes in the center). For example, consider the region bounded above by the graph of the function 

 and below by the graph of the function  over the interval  When this region is revolved 
around the  the result is a solid with a cavity in the middle, and the slices are washers. The graph of the function 
and a representative washer are shown in Figure 6.22(a) and (b). The region of revolution and the resulting solid are 
shown in Figure 6.22(c) and (d). 



562     6 • Applications of Integration

Figure 6.22 (a) A thin rectangle in the region between two curves. (b) A representative washer formed by revolving the 
rectangle about the  (c) The region between the curves over the given interval. (d) The resulting solid of revolution. 
The cross-sectional area, then, is the area of the outer circle less the area of the inner circle. In this case, 

Then the volume of the solid is 

Generalizing this process gives the washer method. 

Rule: The Washer Method 

Suppose  and  are continuous, nonnegative functions such that  over  Let  denote the 
region bounded above by the graph of  below by the graph of  on the left by the line  and on the 
right by the line  Then, the volume of the solid of revolution formed by revolving  around the  is given 
by 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.2 • Determining Volumes by Slicing     563

(6.5) 

EXAMPLE 6.10 

Using the Washer Method 
Find the volume of a solid of revolution formed by revolving the region bounded above by the graph of  and 
below by the graph of  over the interval  around the 

Solution 
The graphs of the functions and the solid of revolution are shown in the following figure. 

Figure 6.23 (a) The region between the graphs of the functions  and  over the interval  (b) 
Revolving the region about the  generates a solid of revolution with a cavity in the middle. 
We have 

 6.10 Find the volume of a solid of revolution formed by revolving the region bounded by the graphs of 
 and  over the interval  around the 

As with the disk method, we can also apply the washer method to solids of revolution that result from revolving a region 
around the y-axis. In this case, the following rule applies. 

Rule: The Washer Method for Solids of Revolution around the y-axis 

Suppose  and  are continuous, nonnegative functions such that  for  Let  denote the 
region bounded on the right by the graph of  on the left by the graph of  below by the line  and 
above by the line  Then, the volume of the solid of revolution formed by revolving  around the  is given 
by 



564     6 • Applications of Integration

Rather than looking at an example of the washer method with the  as the axis of revolution, we now consider an 
example in which the axis of revolution is a line other than one of the two coordinate axes. The same general method 
applies, but you may have to visualize just how to describe the cross-sectional area of the volume. 

EXAMPLE 6.11 

The Washer Method with a Different Axis of Revolution 
Find the volume of a solid of revolution formed by revolving the region bounded above by  and below by 
the  over the interval  around the line 

Solution 
The graph of the region and the solid of revolution are shown in the following figure. 

Figure 6.24 (a) The region between the graph of the function  and the  over the interval  (b) 
Revolving the region about the line  generates a solid of revolution with a cylindrical hole through its middle. 
We can’t apply the volume formula to this problem directly because the axis of revolution is not one of the coordinate 
axes. However, we still know that the area of the cross-section is the area of the outer circle less the area of the inner 
circle. Looking at the graph of the function, we see the radius of the outer circle is given by  which simplifies to 

The radius of the inner circle is  Therefore, we have 

 6.11 Find the volume of a solid of revolution formed by revolving the region bounded above by the graph of 
 and below by the  over the interval  around the line 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.2 • Determining Volumes by Slicing     565

 SECTION 6.2 EXERCISES 
58 . Derive the formula for the  59 . Use the slicing method to  60 . Use the slicing method to 

volume of a sphere using derive the formula for the derive the formula for the 
the slicing method. volume of a cone. volume of a tetrahedron 

with side length 
61 . Use the disk method to  62 . Explain when you would 

derive the formula for the use the disk method versus 
volume of a trapezoidal the washer method. When 
cylinder. are they interchangeable? 

For the following exercises, draw a typical slice and find the volume using the slicing method for the given volume. 
63 . A pyramid with height 6  64 . A pyramid with height 4  65 . A tetrahedron with a base 

units and square base of units and a rectangular side of 4 units, as seen 
side 2 units, as pictured base with length 2 units here. 
here. and width 3 units, as 

pictured here. 

66 . A pyramid with height 5 units, and  67 . A cone of radius  and height  has 
an isosceles triangular base with a smaller cone of radius  and 
lengths of 6 units and 8 units, as height  removed from the top, as 
seen here. seen here. The resulting solid is 

called a frustum. 



566     6 • Applications of Integration

For the following exercises, draw an outline of the solid and find the volume using the slicing method. 
68 . The base is a circle of  69 . The base is a triangle with  70 . The base is the region 

radius  The slices vertices  and under the parabola 
perpendicular to the base  Slices perpendicular  in the first 
are squares. to the x-axis are quadrant. Slices 

semicircles. perpendicular to the 
xy-plane and parallel to the 
y-axis are squares. 

71 . The base is the region  72 . The base is the region  73 . The base is the area 
under the parabola enclosed by  and between  and 

 and above the  Slices perpendicular Slices perpendicular to the 
 Slices perpendicular to the x-axis are right x-axis are semicircles. 

to the  are squares. isosceles triangles. The 
intersection of one of these 
slices and the base is the 
leg of the triangle. 

For the following exercises, draw the region bounded by the curves. Then, use the disk method to find the volume when 
the region is rotated around the x-axis. 

74 .  75 .  76 . 

77 .  78 .  79 . 

80 .  81 . 

For the following exercises, draw the region bounded by the curves. Then, find the volume when the region is rotated 
around the y-axis. 

82 .  83 .  84 . 

85 .  86 . 

87 .  88 . 

89 . 

For the following exercises, draw the region bounded by the curves. Then, find the volume when the region is rotated 
around the x-axis. 

90 .  91 .  92 . 

93 .  94 . [T]  95 . 

96 .  97 . 

For the following exercises, draw the region bounded by the curves. Then, use the washer method to find the volume 
when the region is revolved around the y-axis. 

98 .  99 .  100 . 

101.  102 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.2 • Determining Volumes by Slicing     567

103. Yogurt containers can be shaped like frustums. 
Rotate the line  around the y-axis to find the 
volume between 

104. Rotate the ellipse  around the 
x-axis to approximate the volume of a football, as seen 
here. 



568     6 • Applications of Integration

105. Rotate the ellipse  around  106 . A better approximation of the volume of a football 
the y-axis to approximate the volume of a is given by the solid that comes from rotating 
football.  around the x-axis from  to 

What is the volume of this football approximation, 
as seen here? 

107. What is the volume of the Bundt cake that comes 
from rotating  around the y-axis from 

 to 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.3 • Volumes of Revolution: Cylindrical Shells     569

For the following exercises, find the volume of the solid described. 
108. The base is the region  109 . The base is the region  110 . Bore a hole of radius  down 

between  and enclosed by the generic the axis of a right cone of 
 Slices ellipse height  and radius  through 

perpendicular to the the base of the cone as seen 
x-axis are semicircles. Slices perpendicular to here. 

the x-axis are semicircles. 

111. Find the volume common  112 . Find the volume of a spherical cap o1f 13 . Find the volume of a sphere of radius 
to two spheres of radius height  and radius  where  as  with a cap of height  removed 
with centers that are seen here. from the top, as seen here. 
apart, as shown here. 

6.3 Volumes of Revolution: Cylindrical Shells 
Learning Objectives 

6.3.1 Calculate the volume of a solid of revolution by using the method of cylindrical shells. 
6.3.2 Compare the different methods for calculating a volume of revolution. 

In this section, we examine the method of cylindrical shells, the final method for finding the volume of a solid of 
revolution. We can use this method on the same kinds of solids as the disk method or the washer method; however, with 
the disk and washer methods, we integrate along the coordinate axis parallel to the axis of revolution. With the method 
of cylindrical shells, we integrate along the coordinate axis perpendicular to the axis of revolution. The ability to choose 
which variable of integration we want to use can be a significant advantage with more complicated functions. Also, the 
specific geometry of the solid sometimes makes the method of using cylindrical shells more appealing than using the 
washer method. In the last part of this section, we review all the methods for finding volume that we have studied and 
lay out some guidelines to help you determine which method to use in a given situation. 

The Method of Cylindrical Shells 
Again, we are working with a solid of revolution. As before, we define a region  bounded above by the graph of a 
function  below by the  and on the left and right by the lines  and  respectively, as shown in 
Figure 6.25(a). We then revolve this region around the y-axis, as shown in Figure 6.25(b). Note that this is different from 
what we have done before. Previously, regions defined in terms of functions of  were revolved around the  or a 
line parallel to it. 



570     6 • Applications of Integration

Figure 6.25 (a) A region bounded by the graph of a function of  (b) The solid of revolution formed when the region is 
revolved around the 
As we have done many times before, partition the interval  using a regular partition,  and, for 

 choose a point  Then, construct a rectangle over the interval  of height 
and width  A representative rectangle is shown in Figure 6.26(a). When that rectangle is revolved around the y-axis, 
instead of a disk or a washer, we get a cylindrical shell, as shown in the following figure. 

Figure 6.26 (a) A representative rectangle. (b) When this rectangle is revolved around the  the result is a cylindrical 
shell. (c) When we put all the shells together, we get an approximation of the original solid. 
To calculate the volume of this shell, consider Figure 6.27. 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.3 • Volumes of Revolution: Cylindrical Shells     571

Figure 6.27 Calculating the volume of the shell. 
The shell is a cylinder, so its volume is the cross-sectional area multiplied by the height of the cylinder. The cross-sections 
are annuli (ring-shaped regions—essentially, circles with a hole in the center), with outer radius  and inner radius 
Thus, the cross-sectional area is  The height of the cylinder is  Then the volume of the shell is 

Note that  so we have 

Furthermore,  is both the midpoint of the interval  and the average radius of the shell, and we can 
approximate this by  We then have 

Another way to think of this is to think of making a vertical cut in the shell and then opening it up to form a flat plate 
(Figure 6.28). 

Figure 6.28 (a) Make a vertical cut in a representative shell. (b) Open the shell up to form a flat plate. 



572     6 • Applications of Integration

In reality, the outer radius of the shell is greater than the inner radius, and hence the back edge of the plate would be 
slightly longer than the front edge of the plate. However, we can approximate the flattened shell by a flat plate of height 

 width  and thickness  (Figure 6.28). The volume of the shell, then, is approximately the volume of the flat 
plate. Multiplying the height, width, and depth of the plate, we get 

which is the same formula we had before. 
To calculate the volume of the entire solid, we then add the volumes of all the shells and obtain 

Here we have another Riemann sum, this time for the function  Taking the limit as ∞  gives us 

∞

This leads to the following rule for the method of cylindrical shells. 

Rule: The Method of Cylindrical Shells 

Let  be continuous and nonnegative. Define  as the region bounded above by the graph of  below by the 
 on the left by the line  and on the right by the line  Then the volume of the solid of revolution 

formed by revolving  around the y-axis is given by 

(6.6) 

Now let’s consider an example. 

EXAMPLE 6.12 

The Method of Cylindrical Shells 1 
Define  as the region bounded above by the graph of  and below by the  over the interval  Find 
the volume of the solid of revolution formed by revolving  around the 

Solution 
First we must graph the region  and the associated solid of revolution, as shown in the following figure. 

Figure 6.29 (a) The region  under the graph of  over the interval  (b) The solid of revolution generated 
by revolving  about the 
Then the volume of the solid is given by 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.3 • Volumes of Revolution: Cylindrical Shells     573

 6.12 Define R as the region bounded above by the graph of  and below by the x-axis over the interval 
 Find the volume of the solid of revolution formed by revolving  around the 

EXAMPLE 6.13 

The Method of Cylindrical Shells 2 
Define R as the region bounded above by the graph of  and below by the  over the interval 
Find the volume of the solid of revolution formed by revolving  around the 

Solution 
First graph the region  and the associated solid of revolution, as shown in the following figure. 

Figure 6.30 (a) The region  under the graph of  over the interval  (b) The volume of revolution 
obtained by revolving  about the 
Then the volume of the solid is given by 

 6.13 Define  as the region bounded above by the graph of  and below by the  over the 
interval  Find the volume of the solid of revolution formed by revolving  around the 

As with the disk method and the washer method, we can use the method of cylindrical shells with solids of revolution, 
revolved around the  when we want to integrate with respect to  The analogous rule for this type of solid is 
given here. 



574     6 • Applications of Integration

Rule: The Method of Cylindrical Shells for Solids of Revolution around the x-axis 

Let  be continuous and nonnegative. Define  as the region bounded on the right by the graph of  on the left 
by the  below by the line  and above by the line  Then, the volume of the solid of revolution formed 
by revolving  around the  is given by 

EXAMPLE 6.14 

The Method of Cylindrical Shells for a Solid Revolved around the x-axis 
Define  as the region bounded on the right by the graph of  and on the left by the  for 
Find the volume of the solid of revolution formed by revolving  around the x-axis. 

Solution 
First, we need to graph the region  and the associated solid of revolution, as shown in the following figure. 

Figure 6.31 (a) The region  to the left of the function  over the interval  (b) The solid of revolution generated 
by revolving  around the 
Label the shaded region  Then the volume of the solid is given by 

 6.14 Define  as the region bounded on the right by the graph of  and on the left by the  for 
 Find the volume of the solid of revolution formed by revolving  around the 

For the next example, we look at a solid of revolution for which the graph of a function is revolved around a line other 
than one of the two coordinate axes. To set this up, we need to revisit the development of the method of cylindrical 
shells. Recall that we found the volume of one of the shells to be given by 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.3 • Volumes of Revolution: Cylindrical Shells     575

This was based on a shell with an outer radius of  and an inner radius of  If, however, we rotate the region around 
a line other than the  we have a different outer and inner radius. Suppose, for example, that we rotate the region 
around the line  where  is some positive constant. Then, the outer radius of the shell is  and the inner 
radius of the shell is  Substituting these terms into the expression for volume, we see that when a plane region 
is rotated around the line  the volume of a shell is given by 

As before, we notice that  is the midpoint of the interval  and can be approximated by  Then, the 
approximate volume of the shell is 

The remainder of the development proceeds as before, and we see that 

We could also rotate the region around other horizontal or vertical lines, such as a vertical line in the right half plane. In 
each case, the volume formula must be adjusted accordingly. Specifically, the  in the integral must be replaced 
with an expression representing the radius of a shell. To see how this works, consider the following example. 

EXAMPLE 6.15 

A Region of Revolution Revolved around a Line 
Define  as the region bounded above by the graph of  and below by the  over the interval  Find 
the volume of the solid of revolution formed by revolving  around the line 

Solution 
First, graph the region  and the associated solid of revolution, as shown in the following figure. 

Figure 6.32 (a) The region  between the graph of  and the  over the interval  (b) The solid of revolution 



576     6 • Applications of Integration

generated by revolving  around the line 
Note that the radius of a shell is given by  Then the volume of the solid is given by 

 6.15 Define  as the region bounded above by the graph of  and below by the  over the interval 
 Find the volume of the solid of revolution formed by revolving  around the line 

For our final example in this section, let’s look at the volume of a solid of revolution for which the region of revolution is 
bounded by the graphs of two functions. 

EXAMPLE 6.16 

A Region of Revolution Bounded by the Graphs of Two Functions 
Define  as the region bounded above by the graph of the function  and below by the graph of the function 

 over the interval  Find the volume of the solid of revolution generated by revolving  around the 

Solution 
First, graph the region  and the associated solid of revolution, as shown in the following figure. 

Figure 6.33 (a) The region  between the graph of  and the graph of  over the interval  (b) The solid of 
revolution generated by revolving  around the 
Note that the axis of revolution is the  so the radius of a shell is given simply by  We don’t need to make any 
adjustments to the x-term of our integrand. The height of a shell, though, is given by  so in this case we need 
to adjust the  term of the integrand. Then the volume of the solid is given by 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.3 • Volumes of Revolution: Cylindrical Shells     577

 6.16 Define  as the region bounded above by the graph of  and below by the graph of  over 
the interval  Find the volume of the solid of revolution formed by revolving  around the 

Which Method Should We Use? 
We have studied several methods for finding the volume of a solid of revolution, but how do we know which method to 
use? It often comes down to a choice of which integral is easiest to evaluate. Figure 6.34 describes the different 
approaches for solids of revolution around the  It’s up to you to develop the analogous table for solids of 
revolution around the 

Figure 6.34 
Let’s take a look at a couple of additional problems and decide on the best approach to take for solving them. 

EXAMPLE 6.17 

Selecting the Best Method 
For each of the following problems, select the best method to find the volume of a solid of revolution generated by 



578     6 • Applications of Integration

revolving the given region around the  and set up the integral to find the volume (do not evaluate the integral). 
a. The region bounded by the graphs of   and the 
b. The region bounded by the graphs of  and the 

Solution 
a. First, sketch the region and the solid of revolution as shown. 

Figure 6.35 (a) The region  bounded by two lines and the  (b) The solid of revolution generated by revolving 
 about the 

Looking at the region, if we want to integrate with respect to  we would have to break the integral into two pieces, 
because we have different functions bounding the region over  and  In this case, using the disk method, 
we would have 

If we used the shell method instead, we would use functions of  to represent the curves, producing 

Neither of these integrals is particularly onerous, but since the shell method requires only one integral, and the 
integrand requires less simplification, we should probably go with the shell method in this case. 

b. First, sketch the region and the solid of revolution as shown. 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.3 • Volumes of Revolution: Cylindrical Shells     579

Figure 6.36 (a) The region  between the curve and the  (b) The solid of revolution generated by revolving 
about the 

Looking at the region, it would be problematic to define a horizontal rectangle; the region is bounded on the left 
and right by the same function. Therefore, we can dismiss the method of shells. The solid has no cavity in the 
middle, so we can use the method of disks. Then 

 6.17 Select the best method to find the volume of a solid of revolution generated by revolving the given region 
around the  and set up the integral to find the volume (do not evaluate the integral): the region 
bounded by the graphs of  and 

 SECTION 6.3 EXERCISES 
For the following exercises, find the volume generated when the region between the two curves is rotated around the 
given axis. Use both the shell method and the washer method. Use technology to graph the functions and draw a typical 
slice by hand. 
114. [T] Bounded by the curves  115 . [T] Bounded by the curves  116 . [T] Bounded by the curves 

 and 
rotated around the rotated around the rotated around the 

117. [T] Bounded by the curves  118 . [T] Bounded by the curves  119 . [T] Bounded by the curves 

rotated around the rotated around the rotated around the 



580     6 • Applications of Integration

For the following exercises, use shells to find the volumes of the given solids. Note that the rotated regions lie between 
the curve and the  and are rotated around the 

120.  121 .  122 . 

123.  124 .  125 . 

126.  127 .  128 . 

129. 

For the following exercises, use shells to find the volume generated by rotating the regions between the given curve and 
 around the 

130.  131 .  and  132 . 
and the x-axis the x-axis and the x-axis 

133.  134 .  135 . 
and the x-axis and the y-axis 

136.  137 .  138 . 
and the x-axis 

139. 

For the following exercises, find the volume generated when the region between the curves is rotated around the given 
axis. 

140.  141 .  142 .  rotated 
rotated around the rotated around the around the 

143.  144 .  145 . 
rotated around the line rotated around the line rotated around the 

146.  147 .  148.  rotated 
rotated around the line rotated around the around the line 

149. [T] Left of 
right of  around the 

For the following exercises, use technology to graph the region. Determine which method you think would be easiest to 
use to calculate the volume generated when the function is rotated around the specified axis. Then, use your chosen 
method to find the volume. 

150. [T]  and  151 . [T] 
rotated around the 

rotated around the  This exercise 
requires advanced technique. You may use 
technology to perform the integration. 

152. [T]  153 . [T]  154 . [T] 

rotated around the rotated around the rotated around the 

155. [T]  156 . [T]  and  157 . [T] 
 rotated around 

rotated around the the rotated around the 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.3 • Volumes of Revolution: Cylindrical Shells     581

For the following exercises, use the method of shells to approximate the volumes of some common objects, which are 
pictured in accompanying figures. 
158. Use the method of shells to find the volume of a  159 . Use the method of shells to find the volume of a 

sphere of radius cone with radius  and height 

160. Use the method of shells to find the volume of an  161 . Use the method of shells to find the volume of a 
ellipsoid  rotated around the cylinder with radius  and height 

162. Use the method of shells to find the volume of the 
donut created when the circle  is rotated 
around the line 

163. Consider the region enclosed by the graphs of  164 . Consider the function 
 and  which 

 What is the volume of the solid decreases from 
generated when this region is rotated around to  Set up the 
the  Assume that the function is defined integrals for determining 
over the interval the volume, using both 

the shell method and the 
disk method, of the solid 
generated when this 
region, with  and 

 is rotated around 
the  Prove that 
both methods 
approximate the same 
volume. Which method is 
easier to apply? (Hint: 
Since  is one-to-one, 
there exists an inverse 



582     6 • Applications of Integration

6.4 Arc Length of a Curve and Surface Area 
Learning Objectives 

6.4.1 Determine the length of a curve,  between two points. 
6.4.2 Determine the length of a curve,  between two points. 
6.4.3 Find the surface area of a solid of revolution. 

In this section, we use definite integrals to find the arc length of a curve. We can think of arc length as the distance you 
would travel if you were walking along the path of the curve. Many real-world applications involve arc length. If a rocket 
is launched along a parabolic path, we might want to know how far the rocket travels. Or, if a curve on a map represents 
a road, we might want to know how far we have to drive to reach our destination. 
We begin by calculating the arc length of curves defined as functions of  then we examine the same process for curves 
defined as functions of  (The process is identical, with the roles of  and  reversed.) The techniques we use to find arc 
length can be extended to find the surface area of a surface of revolution, and we close the section with an examination 
of this concept. 

Arc Length of the Curve y = f(x) 
In previous applications of integration, we required the function  to be integrable, or at most continuous. However, 
for calculating arc length we have a more stringent requirement for  Here, we require  to be differentiable, and 
furthermore we require its derivative,  to be continuous. Functions like this, which have continuous derivatives, are 
called smooth. (This property comes up again in later chapters.) 
Let  be a smooth function defined over  We want to calculate the length of the curve from the point 
to the point  We start by using line segments to approximate the length of the curve. For  let 

 be a regular partition of  Then, for  construct a line segment from the point 
to the point  Although it might seem logical to use either horizontal or vertical line segments, we want our 
line segments to approximate the curve as closely as possible. Figure 6.37 depicts this construct for 

Figure 6.37 We can approximate the length of a curve by adding line segments. 
To help us find the length of each line segment, we look at the change in vertical distance as well as the change in 
horizontal distance over each interval. Because we have used a regular partition, the change in horizontal distance over 
each interval is given by  The change in vertical distance varies from interval to interval, though, so we use 

 to represent the change in vertical distance over the interval  as shown in Figure 6.38. 
Note that some (or all)  may be negative. 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.4 • Arc Length of a Curve and Surface Area     583

Figure 6.38 A representative line segment approximates the curve over the interval 

By the Pythagorean theorem, the length of the line segment is  We can also write this as 
 Now, by the Mean Value Theorem, there is a point  such that 

 Then the length of the line segment is given by  Adding up the lengths of all 
the line segments, we get 

This is a Riemann sum. Taking the limit as ∞  we have 

∞

We summarize these findings in the following theorem. 

Theorem 6.4 

Arc Length for y = f(x) 
Let  be a smooth function over the interval  Then the arc length of the portion of the graph of  from 
the point  to the point  is given by 

(6.7) 

Note that we are integrating an expression involving  so we need to be sure  is integrable. This is why we 
require  to be smooth. The following example shows how to apply the theorem. 

EXAMPLE 6.18 

Calculating the Arc Length of a Function of x 
Let  Calculate the arc length of the graph of  over the interval  Round the answer to three 
decimal places. 

Solution 
We have  so  Then, the arc length is 



584     6 • Applications of Integration

Substitute  Then,  When  then  and when  then  Thus, 

 6.18 Let  Calculate the arc length of the graph of  over the interval  Round the 
answer to three decimal places. 

Although it is nice to have a formula for calculating arc length, this particular theorem can generate expressions that are 
difficult to integrate. We study some techniques for integration in Introduction to Techniques of Integration 
(http://openstax.org/books/calculus-volume-2/pages/3-introduction). In some cases, we may have to use a computer or 
calculator to approximate the value of the integral. 

EXAMPLE 6.19 

Using a Computer or Calculator to Determine the Arc Length of a Function of x 
Let  Calculate the arc length of the graph of  over the interval 

Solution 
We have  so  Then the arc length is given by 

Using a computer to approximate the value of this integral, we get 

 6.19 Let  Calculate the arc length of the graph of  over the interval  Use a computer or 
calculator to approximate the value of the integral. 

Arc Length of the Curve x = g(y) 
We have just seen how to approximate the length of a curve with line segments. If we want to find the arc length of the 
graph of a function of  we can repeat the same process, except we partition the  instead of the  Figure 6.39 
shows a representative line segment. 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.4 • Arc Length of a Curve and Surface Area     585

Figure 6.39 A representative line segment over the interval 

Then the length of the line segment is  which can also be written as  If we 
now follow the same development we did earlier, we get a formula for arc length of a function 

Theorem 6.5 

Arc Length for x = g(y) 
Let  be a smooth function over a  interval  Then, the arc length of the graph of  from the point 

 to the point  is given by 

(6.8) 

EXAMPLE 6.20 

Calculating the Arc Length of a Function of y 
Let  Calculate the arc length of the graph of  over the interval 

Solution 
We have  so  Then the arc length is 

Using a computer to approximate the value of this integral, we obtain 

 6.20 Let  Calculate the arc length of the graph of  over the interval  Use a computer or 
calculator to approximate the value of the integral. 

Area of a Surface of Revolution 
The concepts we used to find the arc length of a curve can be extended to find the surface area of a surface of 
revolution. Surface area is the total area of the outer layer of an object. For objects such as cubes or bricks, the surface 
area of the object is the sum of the areas of all of its faces. For curved surfaces, the situation is a little more complex. Let 

 be a nonnegative smooth function over the interval  We wish to find the surface area of the surface of 
revolution created by revolving the graph of  around the  as shown in the following figure. 



586     6 • Applications of Integration

Figure 6.40 (a) A curve representing the function  (b) The surface of revolution formed by revolving the graph of 
 around the 

As we have done many times before, we are going to partition the interval  and approximate the surface area by 
calculating the surface area of simpler shapes. We start by using line segments to approximate the curve, as we did 
earlier in this section. For  let  be a regular partition of  Then, for  construct a 
line segment from the point  to the point  Now, revolve these line segments around the 
to generate an approximation of the surface of revolution as shown in the following figure. 

Figure 6.41 (a) Approximating  with line segments. (b) The surface of revolution formed by revolving the line 
segments around the 
Notice that when each line segment is revolved around the axis, it produces a band. These bands are actually pieces of 
cones (think of an ice cream cone with the pointy end cut off). A piece of a cone like this is called a frustum of a cone. 
To find the surface area of the band, we need to find the lateral surface area,  of the frustum (the area of just the 
slanted outside surface of the frustum, not including the areas of the top or bottom faces). Let  and  be the radii of 
the wide end and the narrow end of the frustum, respectively, and let  be the slant height of the frustum as shown in 
the following figure. 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.4 • Arc Length of a Curve and Surface Area     587

Figure 6.42 A frustum of a cone can approximate a small part of surface area. 
We know the lateral surface area of a cone is given by 

where  is the radius of the base of the cone and  is the slant height (see the following figure). 

Figure 6.43 The lateral surface area of the cone is given by 
Since a frustum can be thought of as a piece of a cone, the lateral surface area of the frustum is given by the lateral 
surface area of the whole cone less the lateral surface area of the smaller cone (the pointy tip) that was cut off (see the 
following figure). 

Figure 6.44 Calculating the lateral surface area of a frustum of a cone. 
The cross-sections of the small cone and the large cone are similar triangles, so we see that 

Solving for  we get 



588     6 • Applications of Integration

Then the lateral surface area (SA) of the frustum is 

Let’s now use this formula to calculate the surface area of each of the bands formed by revolving the line segments 
around the  A representative band is shown in the following figure. 

Figure 6.45 A representative band used for determining surface area. 
Note that the slant height of this frustum is just the length of the line segment used to generate it. So, applying the 
surface area formula, we have 

Now, as we did in the development of the arc length formula, we apply the Mean Value Theorem to select 
 such that  This gives us 

Furthermore, since  is continuous, by the Intermediate Value Theorem, there is a point  such that 
 so we get 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.4 • Arc Length of a Curve and Surface Area     589

Then the approximate surface area of the whole surface of revolution is given by 

This almost looks like a Riemann sum, except we have functions evaluated at two different points,  and  over the 
interval  Although we do not examine the details here, it turns out that because  is smooth, if we let 

∞  the limit works the same as a Riemann sum even with the two different evaluation points. This makes sense 
intuitively. Both  and  are in the interval  so it makes sense that as ∞  both  and  approach 
Those of you who are interested in the details should consult an advanced calculus text. 

Taking the limit as ∞  we get 

∞

As with arc length, we can conduct a similar development for functions of  to get a formula for the surface area of 
surfaces of revolution about the  These findings are summarized in the following theorem. 

Theorem 6.6 

Surface Area of a Surface of Revolution 
Let  be a nonnegative smooth function over the interval  Then, the surface area of the surface of revolution 
formed by revolving the graph of  around the x-axis is given by 

(6.9) 

Similarly, let  be a nonnegative smooth function over the interval  Then, the surface area of the surface of 
revolution formed by revolving the graph of  around the  is given by 

EXAMPLE 6.21 

Calculating the Surface Area of a Surface of Revolution 1 
Let  over the interval  Find the surface area of the surface generated by revolving the graph of 
around the  Round the answer to three decimal places. 

Solution 
The graph of  and the surface of rotation are shown in the following figure. 



590     6 • Applications of Integration

Figure 6.46 (a) The graph of  (b) The surface of revolution. 

We have  Then,  and  Then, 

Let  Then,  When   and when   This gives us 

 6.21 Let  over the interval  Find the surface area of the surface generated by revolving 
the graph of  around the  Round the answer to three decimal places. 

EXAMPLE 6.22 

Calculating the Surface Area of a Surface of Revolution 2 
Let  Consider the portion of the curve where  Find the surface area of the surface generated 
by revolving the graph of  around the 

Solution 
Notice that we are revolving the curve around the  and the interval is in terms of  so we want to rewrite the 
function as a function of y. We get  The graph of  and the surface of rotation are shown in the 
following figure. 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.4 • Arc Length of a Curve and Surface Area     591

Figure 6.47 (a) The graph of  (b) The surface of revolution. 

We have  so  and  Then 

Let  Then  When   and when   Then 

 6.22 Let  over the interval  Find the surface area of the surface generated by 
revolving the graph of  around the 

 SECTION 6.4 EXERCISES 
For the following exercises, find the length of the functions over the given interval. 

165.  166 .  167 . 



592     6 • Applications of Integration

168. Pick an arbitrary linear  169 . Find the surface area of the volume  170 . Find the surface area of the 
function  over generated when the curve volume generated when 
any interval of your revolves around the  from the curve  revolves 
choice to  as seen here. around the  from 
Determine the length of  to 
the function and then 
prove the length is correct 
by using geometry. 

For the following exercises, find the lengths of the functions of  over the given interval. If you cannot evaluate the 
integral exactly, use technology to approximate it. 

171.  from  172 .  from  173 .  from 

174.  from  175 . [T]  on  to  176 .  from 
 to 

177.  from  178 .  from  179 .  from 

180. [T]  on 

For the following exercises, find the lengths of the functions of  over the given interval. If you cannot evaluate the 
integral exactly, use technology to approximate it. 

181.  from  to  182 .  from  183 .  from  to 

184. [T]  from  to  185 .  from  186 .  from 
 to 

187. [T]  from  188 . [T]  from  189 . [T]  from 
to  to 

190. [T]  on  to 

For the following exercises, find the surface area of the volume generated when the following curves revolve around the 
 If you cannot evaluate the integral exactly, use your calculator to approximate it. 

191.  from  to  192 .  from  to  193 .  from 

194. [T]  from  195 .  from  196 .  from 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.4 • Arc Length of a Curve and Surface Area     593

197.  from  198 . [T]  from 

For the following exercises, find the surface area of the volume generated when the following curves revolve around the 
 If you cannot evaluate the integral exactly, use your calculator to approximate it. 

199.  from  200 .  from  201 .  from 

202. [T]  from  to  203 .  from  204 . [T]  from  to 

205. [T]  from  to  206 . [T]  from 
to 

207. The base of a lamp is constructed by revolving a 
quarter circle  around the  from 

 to  as seen here. Create an integral for 
the surface area of this curve and compute it. 

208. A light bulb is a sphere with radius  in. with 
the bottom sliced off to fit exactly onto a cylinder 
of radius  in. and length  in., as seen here. 
The sphere is cut off at the bottom to fit exactly 
onto the cylinder, so the radius of the cut is 
in. Find the surface area (not including the top or 
bottom of the cylinder). 



594     6 • Applications of Integration

209. [T] A lampshade is constructed by rotating 
around the  from  to  as seen here. 
Determine how much material you would need to 
construct this lampshade—that is, the surface 
area—accurate to four decimal places. 

210. [T] An anchor drags behind a boat according to  211 . [T] You are building a 
the function  where bridge that will span  ft. 
represents the depth beneath the boat and  is You intend to add 
the horizontal distance of the anchor from the decorative rope in the 
back of the boat. If the anchor is  ft below the shape of 
boat, how much rope do you have to pull to 
reach the anchor? Round your answer to three where  is the distance in 
decimal places. feet from one end of the 

bridge. Find out how 
much rope you need to 
buy, measured in a whole 
number of feet. 

For the following exercises, find the exact arc length for the following problems over the given interval. 
212.  from  213 . [T] Draw graphs of  214 . Compare the lengths of 

 to   and the parabola  and 
(Hint: Recall trigonometric  For  as the line  from 
identities.) increases, formulate a  as 

prediction on the arc increases. What do you 
length from  to notice? 

 Now, compute the 
lengths of these three 
functions and determine 
whether your prediction 
is correct. 

215. Solve for the length of  216 . [T] Which is longer  217 . Explain why the surface 
 from between  and area is infinite when 

 Show that  the hyperbola  is rotated around 
 from  to  or the graph of the  for ∞

 is twice as long. but the volume is finite. 
Graph both functions and 
explain why this is so. 

6.5 Physical Applications 
Learning Objectives 

6.5.1 Determine the mass of a one-dimensional object from its linear density function. 
6.5.2 Determine the mass of a two-dimensional circular object from its radial density function. 
6.5.3 Calculate the work done by a variable force acting along a line. 
6.5.4 Calculate the work done in pumping a liquid from one height to another. 
6.5.5 Find the hydrostatic force against a submerged vertical plate. 

In this section, we examine some physical applications of integration. Let’s begin with a look at calculating mass from a 
density function. We then turn our attention to work, and close the section with a study of hydrostatic force. 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.5 • Physical Applications     595

Mass and Density 
We can use integration to develop a formula for calculating mass based on a density function. First we consider a thin 
rod or wire. Orient the rod so it aligns with the  with the left end of the rod at  and the right end of the rod at 

 (Figure 6.48). Note that although we depict the rod with some thickness in the figures, for mathematical purposes 
we assume the rod is thin enough to be treated as a one-dimensional object. 

Figure 6.48 We can calculate the mass of a thin rod oriented along the  by integrating its density function. 
If the rod has constant density  given in terms of mass per unit length, then the mass of the rod is just the product of 
the density and the length of the rod:  If the density of the rod is not constant, however, the problem becomes a 
little more challenging. When the density of the rod varies from point to point, we use a linear density function,  to 
denote the density of the rod at any point,  Let  be an integrable linear density function. Now, for 
let  be a regular partition of the interval  and for  choose an arbitrary point 
Figure 6.49 shows a representative segment of the rod. 

Figure 6.49 A representative segment of the rod. 
The mass  of the segment of the rod from  to  is approximated by 

Adding the masses of all the segments gives us an approximation for the mass of the entire rod: 

This is a Riemann sum. Taking the limit as ∞  we get an expression for the exact mass of the rod: 

∞

We state this result in the following theorem. 

Theorem 6.7 

Mass–Density Formula of a One-Dimensional Object 
Given a thin rod oriented along the  over the interval  let  denote a linear density function giving the 
density of the rod at a point x in the interval. Then the mass of the rod is given by 

(6.10) 



596     6 • Applications of Integration

We apply this theorem in the next example. 

EXAMPLE 6.23 

Calculating Mass from Linear Density 
Consider a thin rod oriented on the x-axis over the interval  If the density of the rod is given by 
what is the mass of the rod? 

Solution 
Applying Equation 6.10 directly, we have 

 6.23 Consider a thin rod oriented on the x-axis over the interval  If the density of the rod is given by 
 what is the mass of the rod? 

We now extend this concept to find the mass of a two-dimensional disk of radius  As with the rod we looked at in the 
one-dimensional case, here we assume the disk is thin enough that, for mathematical purposes, we can treat it as a two-
dimensional object. We assume the density is given in terms of mass per unit area (called area density), and further 
assume the density varies only along the disk’s radius (called radial density). We orient the disk in the  with the 
center at the origin. Then, the density of the disk can be treated as a function of  denoted  We assume  is 
integrable. Because density is a function of  we partition the interval from  along the  For 
let  be a regular partition of the interval  and for  choose an arbitrary point 
Now, use the partition to break up the disk into thin (two-dimensional) washers. A disk and a representative washer are 
depicted in the following figure. 

Figure 6.50 (a) A thin disk in the xy-plane. (b) A representative washer. 
We now approximate the density and area of the washer to calculate an approximate mass,  Note that the area of the 
washer is given by 

You may recall that we had an expression similar to this when we were computing volumes by shells. As we did there, we 
use  to approximate the average radius of the washer. We obtain 

Using  to approximate the density of the washer, we approximate the mass of the washer by 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.5 • Physical Applications     597

Adding up the masses of the washers, we see the mass  of the entire disk is approximated by 

We again recognize this as a Riemann sum, and take the limit as ∞  This gives us 

∞

We summarize these findings in the following theorem. 

Theorem 6.8 

Mass–Density Formula of a Circular Object 
Let  be an integrable function representing the radial density of a disk of radius  Then the mass of the disk is 
given by 

(6.11) 

EXAMPLE 6.24 

Calculating Mass from Radial Density 
Let  represent the radial density of a disk. Calculate the mass of a disk of radius 4. 

Solution 
Applying the formula, we find 

 6.24 Let  represent the radial density of a disk. Calculate the mass of a disk of radius 2. 

Work Done by a Force 
We now consider work. In physics, work is related to force, which is often intuitively defined as a push or pull on an 
object. When a force moves an object, we say the force does work on the object. In other words, work can be thought of 
as the amount of energy it takes to move an object. According to physics, when we have a constant force, work can be 
expressed as the product of force and distance. 
In the English system, the unit of force is the pound and the unit of distance is the foot, so work is given in foot-pounds. 
In the metric system, kilograms and meters are used. One newton is the force needed to accelerate  kilogram of mass 
at the rate of  m/sec2. Thus, the most common unit of work is the newton-meter. This same unit is also called the joule. 
Both are defined as kilograms times meters squared over seconds squared 

When we have a constant force, things are pretty easy. It is rare, however, for a force to be constant. The work done to 
compress (or elongate) a spring, for example, varies depending on how far the spring has already been compressed (or 
stretched). We look at springs in more detail later in this section. 
Suppose we have a variable force  that moves an object in a positive direction along the x-axis from point  to point 

 To calculate the work done, we partition the interval  and estimate the work done over each subinterval. So, for 
 let  be a regular partition of the interval  and for  choose an arbitrary point 



598     6 • Applications of Integration

 To calculate the work done to move an object from point  to point  we assume the force is 
roughly constant over the interval, and use  to approximate the force. The work done over the interval 
then, is given by 

Therefore, the work done over the interval  is approximately 

Taking the limit of this expression as ∞  gives us the exact value for work: 

∞

Thus, we can define work as follows. 

Definition 

If a variable force  moves an object in a positive direction along the x-axis from point a to point b, then the work 
done on the object is 

(6.12) 

Note that if F is constant, the integral evaluates to  which is the formula we stated at the beginning of 
this section. 
Now let’s look at the specific example of the work done to compress or elongate a spring. Consider a block attached to a 
horizontal spring. The block moves back and forth as the spring stretches and compresses. Although in the real world we 
would have to account for the force of friction between the block and the surface on which it is resting, we ignore friction 
here and assume the block is resting on a frictionless surface. When the spring is at its natural length (at rest), the 
system is said to be at equilibrium. In this state, the spring is neither elongated nor compressed, and in this equilibrium 
position the block does not move until some force is introduced. We orient the system such that  corresponds to 
the equilibrium position (see the following figure). 

Figure 6.51 A block attached to a horizontal spring at equilibrium, compressed, and elongated. 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.5 • Physical Applications     599

According to Hooke’s law, the force required to compress or stretch a spring from an equilibrium position is given by 
 for some constant  The value of  depends on the physical characteristics of the spring. The constant  is 

called the spring constant and is always positive. We can use this information to calculate the work done to compress or 
elongate a spring, as shown in the following example. 

EXAMPLE 6.25 

The Work Required to Stretch or Compress a Spring 
Suppose it takes a force of  N (in the negative direction) to compress a spring  m from the equilibrium position. 
How much work is done to stretch the spring  m from the equilibrium position? 

Solution 
First find the spring constant,  When  we know  so 

and  Then, to calculate work, we integrate the force function, obtaining 

The work done to stretch the spring is  J. 

 6.25 Suppose it takes a force of  lb to stretch a spring  in. from the equilibrium position. How much work is 
done to stretch the spring  ft from the equilibrium position? 

Work Done in Pumping 
Consider the work done to pump water (or some other liquid) out of a tank. Pumping problems are a little more 
complicated than spring problems because many of the calculations depend on the shape and size of the tank. In 
addition, instead of being concerned about the work done to move a single mass, we are looking at the work done to 
move a volume of water, and it takes more work to move the water from the bottom of the tank than it does to move the 
water from the top of the tank. 
We examine the process in the context of a cylindrical tank, then look at a couple of examples using tanks of different 
shapes. Assume a cylindrical tank of radius  m and height  m is filled to a depth of 8 m. How much work does it take 
to pump all the water over the top edge of the tank? 
The first thing we need to do is define a frame of reference. We let  represent the vertical distance below the top of the 
tank. That is, we orient the  vertically, with the origin at the top of the tank and the downward direction being 
positive (see the following figure). 



600     6 • Applications of Integration

Figure 6.52 How much work is needed to empty a tank partially filled with water? 
Using this coordinate system, the water extends from  to  Therefore, we partition the interval  and 
look at the work required to lift each individual “layer” of water. So, for  let  be a regular partition 
of the interval  and for  choose an arbitrary point  Figure 6.53 shows a 
representative layer. 

Figure 6.53 A representative layer of water. 
In pumping problems, the force required to lift the water to the top of the tank is the force required to overcome gravity, 
so it is equal to the weight of the water. Given that the weight-density of water is  N/m3, or  lb/ft3, calculating 
the volume of each layer gives us the weight. In this case, we have 

Then, the force needed to lift each layer is 

Note that this step becomes a little more difficult if we have a noncylindrical tank. We look at a noncylindrical tank in the 
next example. 
We also need to know the distance the water must be lifted. Based on our choice of coordinate systems, we can use 
as an approximation of the distance the layer must be lifted. Then the work to lift the  layer of water  is 
approximately 

Adding the work for each layer, we see the approximate work to empty the tank is given by 

This is a Riemann sum, so taking the limit as ∞  we get 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.5 • Physical Applications     601

∞

The work required to empty the tank is approximately 23,650,000 J. 
For pumping problems, the calculations vary depending on the shape of the tank or container. The following problem-
solving strategy lays out a step-by-step process for solving pumping problems. 

Problem-Solving Strategy 

Solving Pumping Problems 
1. Sketch a picture of the tank and select an appropriate frame of reference. 
2. Calculate the volume of a representative layer of water. 
3. Multiply the volume by the weight-density of water to get the force. 
4. Calculate the distance the layer of water must be lifted. 
5. Multiply the force and distance to get an estimate of the work needed to lift the layer of water. 
6. Sum the work required to lift all the layers. This expression is an estimate of the work required to pump out the 

desired amount of water, and it is in the form of a Riemann sum. 
7. Take the limit as ∞  and evaluate the resulting integral to get the exact work required to pump out the 

desired amount of water. 

We now apply this problem-solving strategy in an example with a noncylindrical tank. 

EXAMPLE 6.26 

A Pumping Problem with a Noncylindrical Tank 
Assume a tank in the shape of an inverted cone, with height  ft and base radius  ft. The tank is full to start with, and 
water is pumped over the upper edge of the tank until the height of the water remaining in the tank is  ft. How much 
work is required to pump out that amount of water? 

Solution 
The tank is depicted in Figure 6.54. As we did in the example with the cylindrical tank, we orient the  vertically, with 
the origin at the top of the tank and the downward direction being positive (step 1). 



602     6 • Applications of Integration

Figure 6.54 A water tank in the shape of an inverted cone. 
The tank starts out full and ends with  ft of water left, so, based on our chosen frame of reference, we need to partition 
the interval  Then, for  let  be a regular partition of the interval  and for 

 choose an arbitrary point  We can approximate the volume of a layer by using a disk, then 
use similar triangles to find the radius of the disk (see the following figure). 

Figure 6.55 Using similar triangles to express the radius of a disk of water. 
From properties of similar triangles, we have 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.5 • Physical Applications     603

Then the volume of the disk is 

The weight-density of water is  lb/ft3, so the force needed to lift each layer is approximately 

Based on the diagram, the distance the water must be lifted is approximately  feet (step 4), so the approximate work 
needed to lift the layer is 

Summing the work required to lift all the layers, we get an approximate value of the total work: 

Taking the limit as ∞  we obtain 

∞

It takes approximately  ft-lb of work to empty the tank to the desired level. 

 6.26 A tank is in the shape of an inverted cone, with height  ft and base radius 6 ft. The tank is filled to a 
depth of 8 ft to start with, and water is pumped over the upper edge of the tank until 3 ft of water remain 
in the tank. How much work is required to pump out that amount of water? 

Hydrostatic Force and Pressure 
In this last section, we look at the force and pressure exerted on an object submerged in a liquid. In the English system, 
force is measured in pounds. In the metric system, it is measured in newtons. Pressure is force per unit area, so in the 
English system we have pounds per square foot (or, perhaps more commonly, pounds per square inch, denoted psi). In 
the metric system we have newtons per square meter, also called pascals. 
Let’s begin with the simple case of a plate of area  submerged horizontally in water at a depth s (Figure 6.56). Then, the 
force exerted on the plate is simply the weight of the water above it, which is given by  where  is the weight 
density of water (weight per unit volume). To find the hydrostatic pressure—that is, the pressure exerted by water on a 
submerged object—we divide the force by the area. So the pressure is 



604     6 • Applications of Integration

Figure 6.56 A plate submerged horizontally in water. 
By Pascal’s principle, the pressure at a given depth is the same in all directions, so it does not matter if the plate is 
submerged horizontally or vertically. So, as long as we know the depth, we know the pressure. We can apply Pascal’s 
principle to find the force exerted on surfaces, such as dams, that are oriented vertically. We cannot apply the formula 

 directly, because the depth varies from point to point on a vertically oriented surface. So, as we have done 
many times before, we form a partition, a Riemann sum, and, ultimately, a definite integral to calculate the force. 
Suppose a thin plate is submerged in water. We choose our frame of reference such that the x-axis is oriented vertically, 
with the downward direction being positive, and point  corresponding to a logical reference point. Let  denote 
the depth at point x. Note we often let  correspond to the surface of the water. In this case, depth at any point is 
simply given by  However, in some cases we may want to select a different reference point for  so we 
proceed with the development in the more general case. Last, let  denote the width of the plate at the point 
Assume the top edge of the plate is at point  and the bottom edge of the plate is at point  Then, for 

 let  be a regular partition of the interval  and for  choose an arbitrary point 
 The partition divides the plate into several thin, rectangular strips (see the following figure). 

Figure 6.57 A thin plate submerged vertically in water. 
Let’s now estimate the force on a representative strip. If the strip is thin enough, we can treat it as if it is at a constant 
depth,  We then have 

Adding the forces, we get an estimate for the force on the plate: 

This is a Riemann sum, so taking the limit gives us the exact force. We obtain 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.5 • Physical Applications     605

(6.13) 
∞

Evaluating this integral gives us the force on the plate. We summarize this in the following problem-solving strategy. 

Problem-Solving Strategy 

Finding Hydrostatic Force 
1. Sketch a picture and select an appropriate frame of reference. (Note that if we select a frame of reference other 

than the one used earlier, we may have to adjust Equation 6.13 accordingly.) 
2. Determine the depth and width functions,  and 
3. Determine the weight-density of whatever liquid with which you are working. The weight-density of water is 

lb/ft3, or 9800 N/m3. 
4. Use the equation to calculate the total force. 

EXAMPLE 6.27 

Finding Hydrostatic Force 
A water trough 15 ft long has ends shaped like inverted isosceles triangles, with base 8 ft and height 3 ft. Find the force 
on one end of the trough if the trough is full of water. 

Solution 
Figure 6.58 shows the trough and a more detailed view of one end. 

Figure 6.58 (a) A water trough with a triangular cross-section. (b) Dimensions of one end of the water trough. 
Select a frame of reference with the  oriented vertically and the downward direction being positive. Select the top 
of the trough as the point corresponding to  (step 1). The depth function, then, is  Using similar triangles, 
we see that  (step 2). Now, the weight density of water is  lb/ft3 (step 3), so applying Equation 6.13, 



606     6 • Applications of Integration

we obtain 

The water exerts a force of 748.8 lb on the end of the trough (step 4). 

 6.27 A water trough 12 m long has ends shaped like inverted isosceles triangles, with base 6 m and height 4 m. 
Find the force on one end of the trough if the trough is full of water. 

EXAMPLE 6.28 

Chapter Opener: Finding Hydrostatic Force 
We now return our attention to the Hoover Dam, mentioned at the beginning of this chapter. The actual dam is arched, 
rather than flat, but we are going to make some simplifying assumptions to help us with the calculations. Assume the 
face of the Hoover Dam is shaped like an isosceles trapezoid with lower base  ft, upper base  ft, and height 
ft (see the following figure). 

When the reservoir is full, Lake Mead’s maximum depth is about 530 ft, and the surface of the lake is about 10 ft below 
the top of the dam (see the following figure). 

Figure 6.59 A simplified model of the Hoover Dam with assumed dimensions. 
a. Find the force on the face of the dam when the reservoir is full. 
b. The southwest United States has been experiencing a drought, and the surface of Lake Mead is about 125 ft below 

where it would be if the reservoir were full. What is the force on the face of the dam under these circumstances? 

Solution 
a. We begin by establishing a frame of reference. As usual, we choose to orient the  vertically, with the 

downward direction being positive. This time, however, we are going to let  represent the top of the dam, 
rather than the surface of the water. When the reservoir is full, the surface of the water is  ft below the top of the 
dam, so  (see the following figure). 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.5 • Physical Applications     607

Figure 6.60 We first choose a frame of reference. 

To find the width function, we again turn to similar triangles as shown in the figure below. 

Figure 6.61 We use similar triangles to determine a function for the width of the dam. (a) Assumed dimensions of 
the dam; (b) highlighting the similar triangles. 

From the figure, we see that  Using properties of similar triangles, we get  Thus, 

Using a weight-density of  lb/ft3 (step 3) and applying Equation 6.13, we get 

Note the change from pounds to tons  lb =  ton) (step 4). 



608     6 • Applications of Integration

b. Notice that the drought changes our depth function,  and our limits of integration. We have 
The lower limit of integration is  The upper limit remains  Evaluating the integral, we get 

 6.28 When the reservoir is at its average level, the surface of the water is about 50 ft below where it would be if 
the reservoir were full. What is the force on the face of the dam under these circumstances? 

 MEDIA 

To learn more about Hoover Dam, see this article (http://www.openstax.org/l/20_HooverDam) published by the 
History Channel. 

 SECTION 6.5 EXERCISES 
For the following exercises, find the work done. 
218. Find the work done when  219 . How much work is done  220 . What is the work done 

a constant force when a person lifts a  lb lifting a  kg child from 
lb moves a chair from box of comics onto a the floor to a height of 

 to  ft. truck that is  ft off the m? (Note that a mass of
ground? kg weighs  N near the 

surface of the Earth.) 
221. Find the work done when  222 . Compute the work done  223 . What is the work done 

you push a box along the for a force  N moving a particle from 
floor  m, when you apply from  to  m.  to  m if the 
a constant force of force acting on it is 

 N? 

For the following exercises, find the mass of the one-dimensional object. 
224. A wire that is  ft long  225 . A car antenna that is  ft  226 . A metal rod that is  in. 

(starting at  and long (starting at long (starting at 
has a density function of and has a density and has a density 

 lb/ft function of function of 
lb/ft lb/in. 

227. A pencil that is  in. long  228 . A ruler that is  in. long 
(starting at  and (starting at  and 
has a density function of has a density function of 

 oz/in. 
oz/in. 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.5 • Physical Applications     609

For the following exercises, find the mass of the two-dimensional object that is centered at the origin. 
229. An oversized hockey puck  230 . A frisbee of radius  in.  231 . A plate of radius  in. 

of radius  in. with density with density function with density function 
function 

232. A jar lid of radius  in.  233 . A disk of radius  cm with  234 . A -in. spring is 
with density function density function stretched to  in. by a 

force of  lb. What is the 
spring constant? 

235. A spring has a natural  236 . A -m spring requires  J  237 . A spring requires  J to 
length of  cm. It takes to stretch the spring to stretch the spring from 
J to stretch the spring to  m. How much work cm to  cm, and an 

 cm. How much work would it take to stretch additional  J to stretch 
would it take to stretch the spring from  m to the spring from  cm to 
the spring from  cm to m?  cm. What is the natural 

 cm? length of the spring? 

238. A shock absorber is  239 . A force of  240 . Find the work done by 
compressed 1 in. by a N stretches a nonlinear winding up a hanging 
weight of 1 t. What is the spring by  meters. What cable of length  ft and 
spring constant? work is required to weight-density  lb/ft. 

stretch the spring from 
 to  m? 

241. For the cable in the  242 . For the cable in the  243 . [T] A pyramid of height 
preceding exercise, how preceding exercise, how  ft has a square base 
much work is done to lift much additional work is  ft by  ft. Find the 
the cable  ft? done by hanging a  lb area  at height  If the 

weight at the end of the rock used to build the 
cable? pyramid weighs 

approximately 
 how much 

work did it take to lift all 
the rock? 

244. [T] For the pyramid in the  245 . [T] The force of gravity on a  246 . [T] For the rocket in the 
preceding exercise, mass  is preceding exercise, find 
assume there were the work to lift the rocket 
workers each working newtons. For a rocket of from  to ∞
hours a day,  days a mass  compute 
week,  weeks a year. If the work to lift the rocket 
the workers, on average, from  to 
lifted 10 100 lb rocks  ft/ km. State your answers with 
hr, how long did it take to three significant figures. 
build the pyramid? (Note: 

and 



610     6 • Applications of Integration

247. [T] A rectangular dam is  248 . [T] Find the work required  249 . [T] Find the work required 
 ft high and  ft wide. to pump all the water out to pump all the water out 

Assume the weight of a cylinder that has a of the cylinder in the 
density of water is 62.5 circular base of radius  ft preceding exercise if the 
lbs/ft3. Compute the total and height  ft. Use the cylinder is only half full. 
force  on the dam when fact that the density of 
a. the surface of the water is  lb/ft3. 

water is at the top of 
the dam and 

b. the surface of the 
water is halfway down 
the dam. 

250. [T] How much work is  251 . A cylinder of depth  and  252 . For the cylinder in the 
required to pump out a cross-sectional area preceding exercise, 
swimming pool if the area stands full of water at compute the work to 
of the base is  ft2, the density  Compute the pump all the water to the 
water is  ft deep, and the work to pump all the top if the cylinder is only 
top is  ft above the water water to the top. half full. 
level? Assume that the 
density of water is  lb/
ft3. 

253. A cone-shaped tank has a 
cross-sectional area that 
increases with its depth: 

 Show 
that the work to empty it 
is half the work for a 
cylinder with the same 
height and base. 

6.6 Moments and Centers of Mass 
Learning Objectives 

6.6.1 Find the center of mass of objects distributed along a line. 
6.6.2 Locate the center of mass of a thin plate. 
6.6.3 Use symmetry to help locate the centroid of a thin plate. 
6.6.4 Apply the theorem of Pappus for volume. 

In this section, we consider centers of mass (also called centroids, under certain conditions) and moments. The basic 
idea of the center of mass is the notion of a balancing point. Many of us have seen performers who spin plates on the 
ends of sticks. The performers try to keep several of them spinning without allowing any of them to drop. If we look at a 
single plate (without spinning it), there is a sweet spot on the plate where it balances perfectly on the stick. If we put the 
stick anywhere other than that sweet spot, the plate does not balance and it falls to the ground. (That is why performers 
spin the plates; the spin helps keep the plates from falling even if the stick is not exactly in the right place.) 
Mathematically, that sweet spot is called the center of mass of the plate. 
In this section, we first examine these concepts in a one-dimensional context, then expand our development to consider 
centers of mass of two-dimensional regions and symmetry. Last, we use centroids to find the volume of certain solids by 
applying the theorem of Pappus. 

Center of Mass and Moments 
Let’s begin by looking at the center of mass in a one-dimensional context. Consider a long, thin wire or rod of negligible 
mass resting on a fulcrum, as shown in Figure 6.62(a). Now suppose we place objects having masses  and  at 
distances  and  from the fulcrum, respectively, as shown in Figure 6.62(b). 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.6 • Moments and Centers of Mass     611

Figure 6.62 (a) A thin rod rests on a fulcrum. (b) Masses are placed on the rod. 
The most common real-life example of a system like this is a playground seesaw, or teeter-totter, with children of 
different weights sitting at different distances from the center. On a seesaw, if one child sits at each end, the heavier 
child sinks down and the lighter child is lifted into the air. If the heavier child slides in toward the center, though, the 
seesaw balances. Applying this concept to the masses on the rod, we note that the masses balance each other if and 
only if 
In the seesaw example, we balanced the system by moving the masses (children) with respect to the fulcrum. However, 
we are really interested in systems in which the masses are not allowed to move, and instead we balance the system by 
moving the fulcrum. Suppose we have two point masses,  and  located on a number line at points  and 
respectively (Figure 6.63). The center of mass,  is the point where the fulcrum should be placed to make the system 
balance. 

Figure 6.63 The center of mass  is the balance point of the system. 
Thus, we have 

The expression in the numerator,  is called the first moment of the system with respect to the origin. If the 
context is clear, we often drop the word first and just refer to this expression as the moment of the system. The 
expression in the denominator,  is the total mass of the system. Thus, the center of mass of the system is the 
point at which the total mass of the system could be concentrated without changing the moment. 
This idea is not limited just to two point masses. In general, if n masses,  are placed on a number line at 
points  respectively, then the center of mass of the system is given by 



612     6 • Applications of Integration

Theorem 6.9 

Center of Mass of Objects on a Line 

Let  be point masses placed on a number line at points  respectively, and let 

denote the total mass of the system. Then, the moment of the system with respect to the origin is given by 

(6.14) 

and the center of mass of the system is given by 

(6.15) 

We apply this theorem in the following example. 

EXAMPLE 6.29 

Finding the Center of Mass of Objects along a Line 
Suppose four point masses are placed on a number line as follows: 

Find the moment of the system with respect to the origin and find the center of mass of the system. 

Solution 
First, we need to calculate the moment of the system: 

Now, to find the center of mass, we need the total mass of the system: 

Then we have 

The center of mass is located 1/2 m to the left of the origin. 

 6.29 Suppose four point masses are placed on a number line as follows: 

Find the moment of the system with respect to the origin and find the center of mass of the system. 

We can generalize this concept to find the center of mass of a system of point masses in a plane. Let  be a point mass 
located at point  in the plane. Then the moment  of the mass with respect to the x-axis is given by 

 Similarly, the moment  with respect to the y-axis is given by  Notice that the x-coordinate 
of the point is used to calculate the moment with respect to the y-axis, and vice versa. The reason is that the x-coordinate 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.6 • Moments and Centers of Mass     613

gives the distance from the point mass to the y-axis, and the y-coordinate gives the distance to the x-axis (see the 
following figure). 

Figure 6.64 Point mass  is located at point  in the plane. 
If we have several point masses in the xy-plane, we can use the moments with respect to the x- and y-axes to calculate 
the x- and y-coordinates of the center of mass of the system. 

Theorem 6.10 

Center of Mass of Objects in a Plane 
Let  be point masses located in the xy-plane at points  respectively, and 

let  denote the total mass of the system. Then the moments  and  of the system with respect to the 

x- and y-axes, respectively, are given by 

(6.16) 

Also, the coordinates of the center of mass  of the system are 

(6.17) 

The next example demonstrates how to apply this theorem. 

EXAMPLE 6.30 

Finding the Center of Mass of Objects in a Plane 
Suppose three point masses are placed in the xy-plane as follows (assume coordinates are given in meters): 

Find the center of mass of the system. 

Solution 
First we calculate the total mass of the system: 

Next we find the moments with respect to the x- and y-axes: 



614     6 • Applications of Integration

Then we have 

The center of mass of the system is  in meters. 

 6.30 Suppose three point masses are placed on a number line as follows (assume coordinates are given in 
meters): 

Find the center of mass of the system. 

Center of Mass of Thin Plates 
So far we have looked at systems of point masses on a line and in a plane. Now, instead of having the mass of a system 
concentrated at discrete points, we want to look at systems in which the mass of the system is distributed continuously 
across a thin sheet of material. For our purposes, we assume the sheet is thin enough that it can be treated as if it is two-
dimensional. Such a sheet is called a lamina. Next we develop techniques to find the center of mass of a lamina. In this 
section, we also assume the density of the lamina is constant. 
Laminas are often represented by a two-dimensional region in a plane. The geometric center of such a region is called its 
centroid. Since we have assumed the density of the lamina is constant, the center of mass of the lamina depends only 
on the shape of the corresponding region in the plane; it does not depend on the density. In this case, the center of 
mass of the lamina corresponds to the centroid of the delineated region in the plane. As with systems of point masses, 
we need to find the total mass of the lamina, as well as the moments of the lamina with respect to the x- and y-axes. 
We first consider a lamina in the shape of a rectangle. Recall that the center of mass of a lamina is the point where the 
lamina balances. For a rectangle, that point is both the horizontal and vertical center of the rectangle. Based on this 
understanding, it is clear that the center of mass of a rectangular lamina is the point where the diagonals intersect, 
which is a result of the symmetry principle, and it is stated here without proof. 

Theorem 6.11 

The Symmetry Principle 
If a region R is symmetric about a line l, then the centroid of R lies on l. 

Let’s turn to more general laminas. Suppose we have a lamina bounded above by the graph of a continuous function 
 below by the x-axis, and on the left and right by the lines  and  respectively, as shown in the following 

figure. 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.6 • Moments and Centers of Mass     615

Figure 6.65 A region in the plane representing a lamina. 
As with systems of point masses, to find the center of mass of the lamina, we need to find the total mass of the lamina, 
as well as the moments of the lamina with respect to the x- and y-axes. As we have done many times before, we 
approximate these quantities by partitioning the interval  and constructing rectangles. 
For  let  be a regular partition of  Recall that we can choose any point within the interval 

 as our  In this case, we want  to be the x-coordinate of the centroid of our rectangles. Thus, for 
 we select  such that  is the midpoint of the interval. That is,  Now, for 
 construct a rectangle of height  on  The center of mass of this rectangle is 

 as shown in the following figure. 

Figure 6.66 A representative rectangle of the lamina. 
Next, we need to find the total mass of the rectangle. Let  represent the density of the lamina (note that  is a constant). 
In this case,  is expressed in terms of mass per unit area. Thus, to find the total mass of the rectangle, we multiply the 
area of the rectangle by  Then, the mass of the rectangle is given by 

To get the approximate mass of the lamina, we add the masses of all the rectangles to get 

This is a Riemann sum. Taking the limit as ∞  gives the exact mass of the lamina: 

∞

Next, we calculate the moment of the lamina with respect to the x-axis. Returning to the representative rectangle, recall 
its center of mass is  Recall also that treating the rectangle as if it is a point mass located at the center 
of mass does not change the moment. Thus, the moment of the rectangle with respect to the x-axis is given by the mass 
of the rectangle,  multiplied by the distance from the center of mass to the x-axis:  Therefore, the 
moment with respect to the x-axis of the rectangle is  Adding the moments of the rectangles and 
taking the limit of the resulting Riemann sum, we see that the moment of the lamina with respect to the x-axis is 

∞

We derive the moment with respect to the y-axis similarly, noting that the distance from the center of mass of the 



616     6 • Applications of Integration

rectangle to the y-axis is  Then the moment of the lamina with respect to the y-axis is given by 

∞

We find the coordinates of the center of mass by dividing the moments by the total mass to give 
 If we look closely at the expressions for  we notice that the constant 

cancels out when  and  are calculated. 
We summarize these findings in the following theorem. 

Theorem 6.12 

Center of Mass of a Thin Plate in the xy-Plane 
Let R denote a region bounded above by the graph of a continuous function  below by the x-axis, and on the left 
and right by the lines  and  respectively. Let  denote the density of the associated lamina. Then we can 
make the following statements: 

i. The mass of the lamina is 

(6.18) 

ii. The moments  and  of the lamina with respect to the x- and y-axes, respectively, are 

(6.19) 

iii. The coordinates of the center of mass  are 
(6.20) 

In the next example, we use this theorem to find the center of mass of a lamina. 

EXAMPLE 6.31 

Finding the Center of Mass of a Lamina 
Let R be the region bounded above by the graph of the function  and below by the x-axis over the interval 

 Find the centroid of the region. 

Solution 
The region is depicted in the following figure. 

Figure 6.67 Finding the center of mass of a lamina. 
Since we are only asked for the centroid of the region, rather than the mass or moments of the associated lamina, we 
know the density constant  cancels out of the calculations eventually. Therefore, for the sake of convenience, let’s 
assume 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.6 • Moments and Centers of Mass     617

First, we need to calculate the total mass: 

Next, we compute the moments: 

and 

Thus, we have 

The centroid of the region is 

 6.31 Let R be the region bounded above by the graph of the function  and below by the x-axis over 
the interval  Find the centroid of the region. 

We can adapt this approach to find centroids of more complex regions as well. Suppose our region is bounded above by 
the graph of a continuous function  as before, but now, instead of having the lower bound for the region be the 
x-axis, suppose the region is bounded below by the graph of a second continuous function,  as shown in the 
following figure. 

Figure 6.68 A region between two functions. 
Again, we partition the interval  and construct rectangles. A representative rectangle is shown in the following 
figure. 



618     6 • Applications of Integration

Figure 6.69 A representative rectangle of the region between two functions. 
Note that the centroid of this rectangle is  We won’t go through all the details of the Riemann 
sum development, but let’s look at some of the key steps. In the development of the formulas for the mass of the lamina 
and the moment with respect to the y-axis, the height of each rectangle is given by  which leads to the 
expression  in the integrands. 
In the development of the formula for the moment with respect to the x-axis, the moment of each rectangle is found by 
multiplying the area of the rectangle,  by the distance of the centroid from the x-axis, 

 which gives  Summarizing these findings, we arrive at the 
following theorem. 

Theorem 6.13 

Center of Mass of a Lamina Bounded by Two Functions 
Let R denote a region bounded above by the graph of a continuous function  below by the graph of the 
continuous function  and on the left and right by the lines  and  respectively. Let  denote the density 
of the associated lamina. Then we can make the following statements: 

i. The mass of the lamina is 

(6.21) 

ii. The moments  and  of the lamina with respect to the x- and y-axes, respectively, are 

(6.22) 

iii. The coordinates of the center of mass  are 
(6.23) 

We illustrate this theorem in the following example. 

EXAMPLE 6.32 

Finding the Centroid of a Region Bounded by Two Functions 
Let R be the region bounded above by the graph of the function  and below by the graph of the function 

 Find the centroid of the region. 

Solution 
The region is depicted in the following figure. 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.6 • Moments and Centers of Mass     619

Figure 6.70 Finding the centroid of a region between two curves. 
The graphs of the functions intersect at  and  so we integrate from −2 to 1. Once again, for the sake of 
convenience, assume 
First, we need to calculate the total mass: 

Next, we compute the moments: 

and 

Therefore, we have 

The centroid of the region is 

 6.32 Let R be the region bounded above by the graph of the function  and below by the graph of 
the function  Find the centroid of the region. 

The Symmetry Principle 
We stated the symmetry principle earlier, when we were looking at the centroid of a rectangle. The symmetry principle 
can be a great help when finding centroids of regions that are symmetric. Consider the following example. 



620     6 • Applications of Integration

EXAMPLE 6.33 

Finding the Centroid of a Symmetric Region 
Let R be the region bounded above by the graph of the function  and below by the x-axis. Find the centroid 
of the region. 

Solution 
The region is depicted in the following figure. 

Figure 6.71 We can use the symmetry principle to help find the centroid of a symmetric region. 
The region is symmetric with respect to the y-axis. Therefore, the x-coordinate of the centroid is zero. We need only 
calculate  Once again, for the sake of convenience, assume 
First, we calculate the total mass: 

Next, we calculate the moments. We only need 

Then we have 

The centroid of the region is 

 6.33 Let R be the region bounded above by the graph of the function  and below by x-axis. Find 
the centroid of the region. 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.6 • Moments and Centers of Mass     621

STUDENT PROJECT 

The Grand Canyon Skywalk 
The Grand Canyon Skywalk opened to the public on March 28, 2007. This engineering marvel is a horseshoe-shaped 
observation platform suspended 4000 ft above the Colorado River on the West Rim of the Grand Canyon. Its crystal-
clear glass floor allows stunning views of the canyon below (see the following figure). 

Figure 6.72 The Grand Canyon Skywalk offers magnificent views of the canyon. (credit: 10da_ralta, Wikimedia 
Commons) 

The Skywalk is a cantilever design, meaning that the observation platform extends over the rim of the canyon, with 
no visible means of support below it. Despite the lack of visible support posts or struts, cantilever structures are 
engineered to be very stable and the Skywalk is no exception. The observation platform is attached firmly to support 
posts that extend 46 ft down into bedrock. The structure was built to withstand 100-mph winds and an 8.0-magnitude 
earthquake within 50 mi, and is capable of supporting more than 70,000,000 lb. 

One factor affecting the stability of the Skywalk is the center of gravity of the structure. We are going to calculate the 
center of gravity of the Skywalk, and examine how the center of gravity changes when tourists walk out onto the 
observation platform. 

The observation platform is U-shaped. The legs of the U are 10 ft wide and begin on land, under the visitors’ center, 
48 ft from the edge of the canyon. The platform extends 70 ft over the edge of the canyon. 

To calculate the center of mass of the structure, we treat it as a lamina and use a two-dimensional region in the 
xy-plane to represent the platform. We begin by dividing the region into three subregions so we can consider each 
subregion separately. The first region, denoted  consists of the curved part of the U. We model  as a 
semicircular annulus, with inner radius 25 ft and outer radius 35 ft, centered at the origin (see the following figure). 



622     6 • Applications of Integration

Figure 6.73 We model the Skywalk with three sub-regions. 

The legs of the platform, extending 35 ft between  and the canyon wall, comprise the second sub-region,  Last, 
the ends of the legs, which extend 48 ft under the visitor center, comprise the third sub-region,  Assume the 
density of the lamina is constant and assume the total weight of the platform is 1,200,000 lb (not including the weight 
of the visitor center; we will consider that later). Use 

1. Compute the area of each of the three sub-regions. Note that the areas of regions  and  should include the 
areas of the legs only, not the open space between them. Round answers to the nearest square foot. 

2. Determine the mass associated with each of the three sub-regions. 
3. Calculate the center of mass of each of the three sub-regions. 
4. Now, treat each of the three sub-regions as a point mass located at the center of mass of the corresponding sub-

region. Using this representation, calculate the center of mass of the entire platform. 
5. Assume the visitor center weighs 2,200,000 lb, with a center of mass corresponding to the center of mass of 

Treating the visitor center as a point mass, recalculate the center of mass of the system. How does the center of 
mass change? 

6. Although the Skywalk was built to limit the number of people on the observation platform to 120, the platform is 
capable of supporting up to 800 people weighing 200 lb each. If all 800 people were allowed on the platform, 
and all of them went to the farthest end of the platform, how would the center of gravity of the system be 
affected? (Include the visitor center in the calculations and represent the people by a point mass located at the 
farthest edge of the platform, 70 ft from the canyon wall.) 

Theorem of Pappus 
This section ends with a discussion of the theorem of Pappus for volume, which allows us to find the volume of 
particular kinds of solids by using the centroid. (There is also a theorem of Pappus for surface area, but it is much less 
useful than the theorem for volume.) 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.6 • Moments and Centers of Mass     623

Theorem 6.14 

Theorem of Pappus for Volume 
Let R be a region in the plane and let l be a line in the plane that does not intersect R. Then the volume of the solid of 
revolution formed by revolving R around l is equal to the area of R multiplied by the distance d traveled by the 
centroid of R. 

Proof 
We can prove the case when the region is bounded above by the graph of a function  and below by the graph of a 
function  over an interval  and for which the axis of revolution is the y-axis. In this case, the area of the region 

is  Since the axis of rotation is the y-axis, the distance traveled by the centroid of the region 

depends only on the x-coordinate of the centroid,  which is 

where 

Then, 

and thus 

However, using the method of cylindrical shells, we have 

So, 

and the proof is complete. 
□ 

EXAMPLE 6.34 

Using the Theorem of Pappus for Volume 
Let R be a circle of radius 2 centered at  Use the theorem of Pappus for volume to find the volume of the torus 
generated by revolving R around the y-axis. 

Solution 
The region and torus are depicted in the following figure. 



624     6 • Applications of Integration

Figure 6.74 Determining the volume of a torus by using the theorem of Pappus. (a) A circular region R in the plane; (b) 
the torus generated by revolving R about the y-axis. 
The region R is a circle of radius 2, so the area of R is  units2. By the symmetry principle, the centroid of R is the 
center of the circle. The centroid travels around the y-axis in a circular path of radius 4, so the centroid travels 
units. Then, the volume of the torus is  units3. 

 6.34 Let R be a circle of radius 1 centered at  Use the theorem of Pappus for volume to find the volume of 
the torus generated by revolving R around the y-axis. 

 SECTION 6.6 EXERCISES 
For the following exercises, calculate the center of mass for the collection of masses given. 
254.  at  and  255 .  at  and  256 .  at 

 at  at 
257. Unit masses at  258 .  at  and  259 .  at  and 

 at  at 

For the following exercises, compute the center of mass 

260.  for  261 .  for  262 .  for  and 
 for 

263.  for  264 .  for  265 .  for 

266.  for  267 .  for  268 .  for 

269.  for 

For the following exercises, compute the center of mass  Use symmetry to help locate the center of mass 
whenever possible. 
270.  in the square  271 .  in the triangle with  272 .  for the region 

 vertices   and bounded by 
 

and 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.6 • Moments and Centers of Mass     625

For the following exercises, use a calculator to draw the region, then compute the center of mass  Use symmetry 
to help locate the center of mass whenever possible. 
273. [T] The region bounded  274 . [T] The region between  275 . [T] The region between 

by     and 
and and 

276. [T] Region between  277 . [T] The region bounded  278 . [T] The region bounded 
  by  by   and 

and 

279. [T] The region bounded 
by  and  in 
the first quadrant 

For the following exercises, use the theorem of Pappus to determine the volume of the shape. 
280. Rotating  around  281 . Rotating  around  282 . A general cone created by 

the -axis between the -axis between rotating a triangle with 
and and vertices   and 

 around the -axis. 
Does your answer agree 
with the volume of a 
cone? 

283. A general cylinder created  284 . A sphere created by 
by rotating a rectangle rotating a semicircle with 
with vertices radius  around the 

 and -axis. Does your answer 
around the -axis. Does agree with the volume of 
your answer agree with a sphere? 
the volume of a cylinder? 

For the following exercises, use a calculator to draw the region enclosed by the curve. Find the area  and the centroid 
 for the given shapes. Use symmetry to help locate the center of mass whenever possible. 

285. [T] Quarter-circle:  286 . [T] Triangle:  287 . [T] Lens:  and 
  and  and 

288. [T] Ring:  and  289 . [T] Half-ring:  290 . Find the generalized 
 and center of mass in the 

sliver between 
and  with 
Then, use the Pappus 
theorem to find the 
volume of the solid 
generated when revolving 
around the y-axis. 



626     6 • Applications of Integration

291. Find the generalized  292 . Find the generalized  293 . Use the theorem of Pappus to find 
center of mass between center of mass between the volume of a torus (pictured 

  and   and here). Assume that a disk of radius 
 Then, use the  Then, use the is positioned with the left end of the 

Pappus theorem to find Pappus theorem to find circle at   and is rotated 
the volume of the solid the volume of the solid around the y-axis. 
generated when revolving generated when revolving 
around the y-axis. around the y-axis. 

294. Find the center of mass 
 for a thin wire 

along the semicircle 
 with unit 

mass. (Hint: Use the 
theorem of Pappus.) 

6.7 Integrals, Exponential Functions, and Logarithms 
Learning Objectives 

6.7.1 Write the definition of the natural logarithm as an integral. 
6.7.2 Recognize the derivative of the natural logarithm. 
6.7.3 Integrate functions involving the natural logarithmic function. 
6.7.4 Define the number  through an integral. 
6.7.5 Recognize the derivative and integral of the exponential function. 
6.7.6 Prove properties of logarithms and exponential functions using integrals. 
6.7.7 Express general logarithmic and exponential functions in terms of natural logarithms and 

exponentials. 
We already examined exponential functions and logarithms in earlier chapters. However, we glossed over some key 
details in the previous discussions. For example, we did not study how to treat exponential functions with exponents that 
are irrational. The definition of the number e is another area where the previous development was somewhat 
incomplete. We now have the tools to deal with these concepts in a more mathematically rigorous way, and we do so in 
this section. 
For purposes of this section, assume we have not yet defined the natural logarithm, the number e, or any of the 
integration and differentiation formulas associated with these functions. By the end of the section, we will have studied 
these concepts in a mathematically rigorous way (and we will see they are consistent with the concepts we learned 
earlier). 
We begin the section by defining the natural logarithm in terms of an integral. This definition forms the foundation for 
the section. From this definition, we derive differentiation formulas, define the number  and expand these concepts to 
logarithms and exponential functions of any base. 

The Natural Logarithm as an Integral 
Recall the power rule for integrals: 

Clearly, this does not work when  as it would force us to divide by zero. So, what do we do with  Recall 

from the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus that  is an antiderivative of  Therefore, we can make the 

following definition. 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.7 • Integrals, Exponential Functions, and Logarithms     627

Definition 

For  define the natural logarithm function by 

(6.24) 

For  this is just the area under the curve  from  to  For  we have  so in this 

case it is the negative of the area under the curve from  (see the following figure). 

Figure 6.75 (a) When  the natural logarithm is the area under the curve  from  (b) When  the 
natural logarithm is the negative of the area under the curve from  to 
Notice that  Furthermore, the function  for  Therefore, by the properties of integrals, it is clear 
that  is increasing for 

Properties of the Natural Logarithm 
Because of the way we defined the natural logarithm, the following differentiation formula falls out immediately as a 
result of to the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus. 

Theorem 6.15 

Derivative of the Natural Logarithm 
For  the derivative of the natural logarithm is given by 

Theorem 6.16 

Corollary to the Derivative of the Natural Logarithm 
The function  is differentiable; therefore, it is continuous. 

A graph of  is shown in Figure 6.76. Notice that it is continuous throughout its domain of ∞



628     6 • Applications of Integration

Figure 6.76 The graph of  shows that it is a continuous function. 

EXAMPLE 6.35 

Calculating Derivatives of Natural Logarithms 
Calculate the following derivatives: 

a. 
b. 

Solution 
We need to apply the chain rule in both cases. 

a. 

b. 

 6.35 Calculate the following derivatives: 

a. 
b. 

Note that if we use the absolute value function and create a new function  we can extend the domain of the 
natural logarithm to include  Then  This gives rise to the familiar integration formula. 

Theorem 6.17 

Integral of (1/u) du 
The natural logarithm is the antiderivative of the function 

EXAMPLE 6.36 

Calculating Integrals Involving Natural Logarithms 
Calculate the integral 

Solution 
Using -substitution, let  Then  and we have 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.7 • Integrals, Exponential Functions, and Logarithms     629

 6.36 Calculate the integral 

Although we have called our function a “logarithm,” we have not actually proved that any of the properties of logarithms 
hold for this function. We do so here. 

Theorem 6.18 

Properties of the Natural Logarithm 
If  and  is a rational number, then 

i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 

Proof 
i. By definition, 

ii. We have 

Use  on the last integral in this expression. Let  Then  Furthermore, when 
and when  So we get 

iv. Note that 

Furthermore, 

Since the derivatives of these two functions are the same, by the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus, they must differ by a 
constant. So we have 

for some constant  Taking  we get 



630     6 • Applications of Integration

Thus  and the proof is complete. Note that we can extend this property to irrational values of  later in this 
section. 
Part iii. follows from parts ii. and iv. and the proof is left to you. 
□ 

EXAMPLE 6.37 

Using Properties of Logarithms 
Use properties of logarithms to simplify the following expression into a single logarithm: 

Solution 
We have 

 6.37 Use properties of logarithms to simplify the following expression into a single logarithm: 

Defining the Number e 
Now that we have the natural logarithm defined, we can use that function to define the number 

Definition 

The number  is defined to be the real number such that 

To put it another way, the area under the curve  between  and  is  (Figure 6.77). The proof that such a 
number exists and is unique is left to you. (Hint: Use the Intermediate Value Theorem to prove existence and the fact 
that  is increasing to prove uniqueness.) 

Figure 6.77 The area under the curve from  to  is equal to one. 
The number  can be shown to be irrational, although we won’t do so here (see the Student Project in Taylor and 
Maclaurin Series (http://openstax.org/books/calculus-volume-2/pages/6-3-taylor-and-maclaurin-series)). Its approximate 
value is given by 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.7 • Integrals, Exponential Functions, and Logarithms     631

The Exponential Function 
We now turn our attention to the function  Note that the natural logarithm is one-to-one and therefore has an inverse 
function. For now, we denote this inverse function by  Then, 

The following figure shows the graphs of  and 

Figure 6.78 The graphs of  and 
We hypothesize that  For rational values of  this is easy to show. If  is rational, then we have 

 Thus, when  is rational,  For irrational values of  we simply define  as the inverse 
function of 

Definition 

For any real number  define  to be the number for which 

(6.25) 

Then we have  for all  and thus 

(6.26) 

for all 

Properties of the Exponential Function 
Since the exponential function was defined in terms of an inverse function, and not in terms of a power of  we must 
verify that the usual laws of exponents hold for the function 

Theorem 6.19 

Properties of the Exponential Function 
If  and  are any real numbers and  is a rational number, then 

i. 
ii. 
iii. 



632     6 • Applications of Integration

Proof 
Note that if  and  are rational, the properties hold. However, if  or  are irrational, we must apply the inverse function 
definition of  and verify the properties. Only the first property is verified here; the other two are left to you. We have 

Since  is one-to-one, then 

□ 
As with part iv. of the logarithm properties, we can extend property iii. to irrational values of  and we do so by the end 
of the section. 
We also want to verify the differentiation formula for the function  To do this, we need to use implicit 
differentiation. Let  Then 

Thus, we see 

as desired, which leads immediately to the integration formula 

We apply these formulas in the following examples. 

EXAMPLE 6.38 

Using Properties of Exponential Functions 
Evaluate the following derivatives: 

a. 
b. 

Solution 
We apply the chain rule as necessary. 

a. 
b. 

 6.38 Evaluate the following derivatives: 

a. 

b. 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.7 • Integrals, Exponential Functions, and Logarithms     633

EXAMPLE 6.39 

Using Properties of Exponential Functions 
Evaluate the following integral: 

Solution 
Using -substitution, let  Then  and we have 

 6.39 Evaluate the following integral: 

General Logarithmic and Exponential Functions 
We close this section by looking at exponential functions and logarithms with bases other than  Exponential functions 
are functions of the form  Note that unless  we still do not have a mathematically rigorous definition of 
these functions for irrational exponents. Let’s rectify that here by defining the function  in terms of the 
exponential function  We then examine logarithms with bases other than  as inverse functions of exponential 
functions. 

Definition 

For any  and for any real number  define  as follows: 

Now  is defined rigorously for all values of x. This definition also allows us to generalize property iv. of logarithms and 
property iii. of exponential functions to apply to both rational and irrational values of  It is straightforward to show that 
properties of exponents hold for general exponential functions defined in this way. 
Let’s now apply this definition to calculate a differentiation formula for  We have 

The corresponding integration formula follows immediately. 

Theorem 6.20 

Derivatives and Integrals Involving General Exponential Functions 
Let  Then, 

and 

If  then the function  is one-to-one and has a well-defined inverse. Its inverse is denoted by  Then, 

Note that general logarithm functions can be written in terms of the natural logarithm. Let  Then, 
Taking the natural logarithm of both sides of this second equation, we get 



634     6 • Applications of Integration

Thus, we see that all logarithmic functions are constant multiples of one another. Next, we use this formula to find a 
differentiation formula for a logarithm with base  Again, let  Then, 

Theorem 6.21 

Derivatives of General Logarithm Functions 
Let  Then, 

EXAMPLE 6.40 

Calculating Derivatives of General Exponential and Logarithm Functions 
Evaluate the following derivatives: 

a. 
b. 

Solution 
We need to apply the chain rule as necessary. 

a. 
b. 

 6.40 Evaluate the following derivatives: 

a. 
b. 

EXAMPLE 6.41 

Integrating General Exponential Functions 
Evaluate the following integral: 

Solution 
Use  and let  Then  and we have 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.7 • Integrals, Exponential Functions, and Logarithms     635

 6.41 Evaluate the following integral: 

 SECTION 6.7 EXERCISES 
For the following exercises, find the derivative 

295.  296 .  297 . 

For the following exercises, find the indefinite integral. 

298.  299 . 

For the following exercises, find the derivative  (You can use a calculator to plot the function and the derivative to 
confirm that it is correct.) 

300. [T]  301 . [T]  302 . [T] 

303. [T]  304 . [T]  305 . [T] 
306. [T]  307 . [T]  308 . [T] 

309. [T] 

For the following exercises, find the definite or indefinite integral. 

310.  311 .  312 . 

313.  314 .  315 . 

316.  317 .  318 . 

319. 

For the following exercises, compute  by differentiating 

320.  321 .  322 . 

323.  324 .  325 . 

326.  327 .  328 . 

329. 

For the following exercises, evaluate by any method. 

330.  331 .  332 . 

333.  334 . 



636     6 • Applications of Integration

For the following exercises, use the function  If you are unable to find intersection points analytically, use a 
calculator. 
335. Find the area of the  336 . [T] Find the arc length of  337 . Find the area between 

region enclosed by  from  to  and the x-axis from 
and  above 

338. Find the volume of the shape create3d39 . [T] Find the surface area 
when rotating this curve from of the shape created 

 around the x-axis, as when rotating the curve 
pictured here. in the previous exercise 

from  to 
around the x-axis. 

If you are unable to find intersection points analytically in the following exercises, use a calculator. 
340. Find the area of the  341 . [T] Find the arc length of  342 . Find the area under 

hyperbolic quarter-circle  from  and above the 
enclosed by x-axis from 

 above 

For the following exercises, verify the derivatives and antiderivatives. 

343.  344 .  345 . 

346.  347 . 

6.8 Exponential Growth and Decay 
Learning Objectives 

6.8.1 Use the exponential growth model in applications, including population growth and compound 
interest. 

6.8.2 Explain the concept of doubling time. 
6.8.3 Use the exponential decay model in applications, including radioactive decay and Newton’s law of 

cooling. 
6.8.4 Explain the concept of half-life. 

One of the most prevalent applications of exponential functions involves growth and decay models. Exponential growth 
and decay show up in a host of natural applications. From population growth and continuously compounded interest to 
radioactive decay and Newton’s law of cooling, exponential functions are ubiquitous in nature. In this section, we 
examine exponential growth and decay in the context of some of these applications. 

Exponential Growth Model 
Many systems exhibit exponential growth. These systems follow a model of the form  where  represents the 
initial state of the system and  is a positive constant, called the growth constant. Notice that in an exponential growth 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.8 • Exponential Growth and Decay     637

model, we have 

(6.27) 

That is, the rate of growth is proportional to the current function value. This is a key feature of exponential growth. 
Equation 6.27 involves derivatives and is called a differential equation. We learn more about differential equations in 
Introduction to Differential Equations (http://openstax.org/books/calculus-volume-2/pages/4-introduction). 

Rule: Exponential Growth Model 

Systems that exhibit exponential growth increase according to the mathematical model 

where  represents the initial state of the system and  is a constant, called the growth constant. 

Population growth is a common example of exponential growth. Consider a population of bacteria, for instance. It seems 
plausible that the rate of population growth would be proportional to the size of the population. After all, the more 
bacteria there are to reproduce, the faster the population grows. Figure 6.79 and Table 6.1 represent the growth of a 
population of bacteria with an initial population of  bacteria and a growth constant of  Notice that after only 
hours  minutes), the population is  times its original size! 

Figure 6.79 An example of exponential growth for bacteria. 

Time (min) Population Size (no. of bacteria) 

Table 6.1 Exponential Growth of a Bacterial 
Population 



638     6 • Applications of Integration

Time (min) Population Size (no. of bacteria) 

Table 6.1 Exponential Growth of a Bacterial 
Population 

Note that we are using a continuous function to model what is inherently discrete behavior. At any given time, the real-
world population contains a whole number of bacteria, although the model takes on noninteger values. When using 
exponential growth models, we must always be careful to interpret the function values in the context of the 
phenomenon we are modeling. 

EXAMPLE 6.42 

Population Growth 
Consider the population of bacteria described earlier. This population grows according to the function 
where t is measured in minutes. How many bacteria are present in the population after  hours  minutes)? When 
does the population reach  bacteria? 

Solution 
We have  Then 

There are  bacteria in the population after  hours. 
To find when the population reaches  bacteria, we solve the equation 

The population reaches  bacteria after  minutes. 

 6.42 Consider a population of bacteria that grows according to the function  where  is 
measured in minutes. How many bacteria are present in the population after 4 hours? When does the 
population reach  million bacteria? 

Let’s now turn our attention to a financial application: compound interest. Interest that is not compounded is called 
simple interest. Simple interest is paid once, at the end of the specified time period (usually  year). So, if we put  in 
a savings account earning  simple interest per year, then at the end of the year we have 

Compound interest is paid multiple times per year, depending on the compounding period. Therefore, if the bank 
compounds the interest every  months, it credits half of the year’s interest to the account after  months. During the 
second half of the year, the account earns interest not only on the initial  but also on the interest earned during 
the first half of the year. Mathematically speaking, at the end of the year, we have 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.8 • Exponential Growth and Decay     639

Similarly, if the interest is compounded every  months, we have 

and if the interest is compounded daily  times per year), we have  If we extend this concept, so that the 
interest is compounded continuously, after  years we have 

∞

Now let’s manipulate this expression so that we have an exponential growth function. Recall that the number  can be 
expressed as a limit: 

∞

Based on this, we want the expression inside the parentheses to have the form  Let  Note that as 
∞  ∞  as well. Then we get 

∞ ∞ ∞

We recognize the limit inside the brackets as the number  So, the balance in our bank account after  years is given by 
 Generalizing this concept, we see that if a bank account with an initial balance of  earns interest at a rate 

of  compounded continuously, then the balance of the account after  years is 

EXAMPLE 6.43 

Compound Interest 
A 25-year-old student is offered an opportunity to invest some money in a retirement account that pays  annual 
interest compounded continuously. How much does the student need to invest today to have  million when she retires 
at age  What if she could earn  annual interest compounded continuously instead? 

Solution 
We have 

She must invest  at  interest. 
If, instead, she is able to earn  then the equation becomes 

In this case, she needs to invest only  This is roughly two-thirds the amount she needs to invest at  The 
fact that the interest is compounded continuously greatly magnifies the effect of the  increase in interest rate. 

 6.43 Suppose instead of investing at age , the student waits until age  How much would she have to 
invest at  At 

If a quantity grows exponentially, the time it takes for the quantity to double remains constant. In other words, it takes 
the same amount of time for a population of bacteria to grow from  to  bacteria as it does to grow from  to 



640     6 • Applications of Integration

 bacteria. This time is called the doubling time. To calculate the doubling time, we want to know when the quantity 
reaches twice its original size. So we have 

Definition 

If a quantity grows exponentially, the doubling time is the amount of time it takes the quantity to double. It is given 
by 

EXAMPLE 6.44 

Using the Doubling Time 
Assume a population of fish grows exponentially. A pond is stocked initially with  fish. After  months, there are 
fish in the pond. The owner will allow his friends and neighbors to fish on his pond after the fish population reaches 

 When will the owner’s friends be allowed to fish? 

Solution 
We know it takes the population of fish  months to double in size. So, if t represents time in months, by the doubling-
time formula, we have  Then,  Thus, the population is given by  To figure out 
when the population reaches  fish, we must solve the following equation: 

The owner’s friends have to wait  months (a little more than  years) to fish in the pond. 

 6.44 Suppose it takes  months for the fish population in Example 6.44 to reach  fish. Under these 
circumstances, how long do the owner’s friends have to wait? 

Exponential Decay Model 
Exponential functions can also be used to model populations that shrink (from disease, for example), or chemical 
compounds that break down over time. We say that such systems exhibit exponential decay, rather than exponential 
growth. The model is nearly the same, except there is a negative sign in the exponent. Thus, for some positive constant 

 we have 
As with exponential growth, there is a differential equation associated with exponential decay. We have 

Rule: Exponential Decay Model 

Systems that exhibit exponential decay behave according to the model 

where  represents the initial state of the system and  is a constant, called the decay constant. 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.8 • Exponential Growth and Decay     641

The following figure shows a graph of a representative exponential decay function. 

Figure 6.80 An example of exponential decay. 
Let’s look at a physical application of exponential decay. Newton’s law of cooling says that an object cools at a rate 
proportional to the difference between the temperature of the object and the temperature of the surroundings. In other 
words, if  represents the temperature of the object and  represents the ambient temperature in a room, then 

Note that this is not quite the right model for exponential decay. We want the derivative to be proportional to the 
function, and this expression has the additional  term. Fortunately, we can make a change of variables that resolves 
this issue. Let  Then  and our equation becomes 

From our previous work, we know this relationship between y and its derivative leads to exponential decay. Thus, 

and we see that 

where  represents the initial temperature. Let’s apply this formula in the following example. 

EXAMPLE 6.45 

Newton’s Law of Cooling 
According to experienced baristas, the optimal temperature to serve coffee is between  and  Suppose coffee 
is poured at a temperature of  and after  minutes in a  room it has cooled to  When is the coffee first 
cool enough to serve? When is the coffee too cold to serve? Round answers to the nearest half minute. 

Solution 
We have 

Then, the model is 



642     6 • Applications of Integration

The coffee reaches  when 

The coffee can be served about  minutes after it is poured. The coffee reaches  at 

The coffee is too cold to be served about  minutes after it is poured. 

 6.45 Suppose the room is warmer  and, after  minutes, the coffee has cooled only to  When is the 
coffee first cool enough to serve? When is the coffee be too cold to serve? Round answers to the nearest 
half minute. 

Just as systems exhibiting exponential growth have a constant doubling time, systems exhibiting exponential decay have 
a constant half-life. To calculate the half-life, we want to know when the quantity reaches half its original size. Therefore, 
we have 

Note: This is the same expression we came up with for doubling time. 

Definition 

If a quantity decays exponentially, the half-life is the amount of time it takes the quantity to be reduced by half. It is 
given by 

EXAMPLE 6.46 

Radiocarbon Dating 
One of the most common applications of an exponential decay model is carbon dating.  decays (emits a 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.8 • Exponential Growth and Decay     643

radioactive particle) at a regular and consistent exponential rate. Therefore, if we know how much carbon was originally 
present in an object and how much carbon remains, we can determine the age of the object. The half-life of  is 
approximately  years—meaning, after that many years, half the material has converted from the original 
to the new nonradioactive  If we have  g  today, how much is left in  years? If an artifact that 
originally contained  g of carbon now contains  g of carbon, how old is it? Round the answer to the nearest 
hundred years. 

Solution 
We have 

So, the model says 

In  years, we have 

Therefore, in  years,  g of  remains. 
To determine the age of the artifact, we must solve 

The artifact is about  years old. 

 6.46 If we have  g of  how much is left after  years? If an artifact that originally contained 
g of carbon now contains  of carbon, how old is it? Round the answer to the nearest hundred years. 

 SECTION 6.8 EXERCISES 
True or False? If true, prove it. If false, find the true answer. 
348. The doubling time for  349 . If you invest  an  350 . If you leave a  pot 

 is annual rate of interest of of tea at room 
 yields more money in temperature  and 

the first year than a an identical pot in the 
continuous rate of refrigerator  with 
interest.  the tea in the 

refrigerator reaches a 
drinkable temperature 

 more than 
minutes before the tea at 
room temperature. 

351. If given a half-life of t 
years, the constant  for 

 is calculated by 



644     6 • Applications of Integration

For the following exercises, use 
352. If a culture of bacteria  353 . If bacteria increase by a  354 . How old is a skull that 

doubles in  hours, how factor of  in  hours, contains one-fifth as 
many hours does it take how many hours does it much radiocarbon as a 
to multiply by take to increase by modern skull? Note that 

the half-life of 
radiocarbon is 
years. 

355. If a relic contains  as  356 . The population of Cairo  357 . The populations of New 
much radiocarbon as new grew from  million to York and Los Angeles are 
material, can it have come million in  years. Use an growing at  and  a 
from the time of Christ exponential model to find year, respectively. Starting 
(approximately when the population was from  million (New York) 
years ago)? Note that the  million. and  million (Los 
half-life of radiocarbon is Angeles), when are the 

 years. populations equal? Round 
your answer to a whole 
number of years. 

358. Suppose the value of  359 . The effect of advertising  360 . If  at  and 
in Japanese yen decreases decays exponentially. If  at  what 
at  per year. Starting  of the population was  at 
from  when remembers a new 
will product after  days, how 

long will  remember 
it? 

361. If  at  and  362 . If a bank offers annual  363 . What continuous interest 
 at  when interest of  or rate has the same yield as 

does continuous interest of an annual rate of 
 which has a better 

annual yield? 
364. If you deposit  at  365 . You are trying to save  366 . You are cooling a turkey 

 annual interest, how  in  years for that was taken out of the 
many years can you college tuition for your oven with an internal 
withdraw  (starting child. If interest is a temperature of 
after the first year) continuous  how After  minutes of 
without running out of much do you need to resting the turkey in a 
money? invest initially?  apartment, the 

temperature has reached 
 What is the 

temperature of the turkey 
 minutes after taking it 

out of the oven? 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.8 • Exponential Growth and Decay     645

367. You are trying to thaw  368 . You are an archaeologist  369 . The spent fuel of a 
some vegetables that are and are given a bone that nuclear reactor contains 
at a temperature of is claimed to be from a plutonium-239, which has 
To thaw vegetables safely, Tyrannosaurus Rex. You a half-life of  years. 
you must put them in the know these dinosaurs If  barrel containing 
refrigerator, which has an lived during the  of plutonium-239 is 
ambient temperature of Cretaceous Era sealed, how many years 

 You check on your million years to  million must pass until only 
vegetables  hours after years ago), and you find of plutonium-239 is left? 
putting them in the by radiocarbon dating 
refrigerator to find that that there is 
they are now  Plot the amount of 
the resulting temperature radiocarbon. Is this bone 
curve and use it to from the Cretaceous? 
determine when the 
vegetables reach 

For the next set of exercises, use the following table, which features the world population by decade. 

Years since 1950 Population (millions) 

Source: http://www.factmonster.com/ipka/
A0762181.html. 

370. [T] The best-fit  371 . [T] Find and graph the  372 . [T] Find and graph the 
exponential curve to the derivative  of your second derivative of your 
data of the form equation. Where is it equation. Where is it 

 is given by increasing and what is the increasing and what is the 
 Use meaning of this increase? meaning of this increase? 

a graphing calculator to 
graph the data and the 
exponential curve 
together. 

373. [T] Find the predicted 
date when the population 
reaches  billion. Using 
your previous answers 
about the first and 
second derivatives, 
explain why exponential 
growth is unsuccessful in 
predicting the future. 



646     6 • Applications of Integration

For the next set of exercises, use the following table, which shows the population of San Francisco during the 19th 
century. 

Years since 1850 Population (thousands) 

Source: http://www.sfgenealogy.com/sf/history/
hgpop.htm. 

374. [T] The best-fit  375 . [T] Find and graph the  376 . [T] Find and graph the 
exponential curve to the derivative  of your second derivative of your 
data of the form equation. Where is it equation. Where is it 

 is given by increasing? What is the increasing? What is the 
meaning of this increase? meaning of this increase? 

Use a graphing calculator Is there a value where the 
to graph the data and the increase is maximal? 
exponential curve 
together. 

6.9 Calculus of the Hyperbolic Functions 
Learning Objectives 

6.9.1 Apply the formulas for derivatives and integrals of the hyperbolic functions. 
6.9.2 Apply the formulas for the derivatives of the inverse hyperbolic functions and their associated 

integrals. 
6.9.3 Describe the common applied conditions of a catenary curve. 

We were introduced to hyperbolic functions in Introduction to Functions and Graphs, along with some of their basic 
properties. In this section, we look at differentiation and integration formulas for the hyperbolic functions and their 
inverses. 

Derivatives and Integrals of the Hyperbolic Functions 
Recall that the hyperbolic sine and hyperbolic cosine are defined as 

The other hyperbolic functions are then defined in terms of  and  The graphs of the hyperbolic functions are 
shown in the following figure. 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.9 • Calculus of the Hyperbolic Functions     647

Figure 6.81 Graphs of the hyperbolic functions. 
It is easy to develop differentiation formulas for the hyperbolic functions. For example, looking at  we have 

Similarly,  We summarize the differentiation formulas for the hyperbolic functions in the following 
table. 

Table 6.2 Derivatives of 
the Hyperbolic Functions 



648     6 • Applications of Integration

Table 6.2 Derivatives of 
the Hyperbolic Functions 

Let’s take a moment to compare the derivatives of the hyperbolic functions with the derivatives of the standard 
trigonometric functions. There are a lot of similarities, but differences as well. For example, the derivatives of the sine 
functions match:  and  The derivatives of the cosine functions, however, differ 
in sign:  but  As we continue our examination of the hyperbolic functions, 
we must be mindful of their similarities and differences to the standard trigonometric functions. 
These differentiation formulas for the hyperbolic functions lead directly to the following integral formulas. 

EXAMPLE 6.47 

Differentiating Hyperbolic Functions 
Evaluate the following derivatives: 

a. 
b. 

Solution 
Using the formulas in Table 6.2 and the chain rule, we get 

a. 
b. 

 6.47 Evaluate the following derivatives: 

a. 

b. 

EXAMPLE 6.48 

Integrals Involving Hyperbolic Functions 
Evaluate the following integrals: 

a. 

b. 

Solution 
We can use u-substitution in both cases. 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.9 • Calculus of the Hyperbolic Functions     649

a. Let  Then,  and 

b. Let  Then,  and 

Note that  for all  so we can eliminate the absolute value signs and obtain 

 6.48 Evaluate the following integrals: 

a. 

b. 

Calculus of Inverse Hyperbolic Functions 
Looking at the graphs of the hyperbolic functions, we see that with appropriate range restrictions, they all have inverses. 
Most of the necessary range restrictions can be discerned by close examination of the graphs. The domains and ranges 
of the inverse hyperbolic functions are summarized in the following table. 

Function Domain Range 

∞ ∞ ∞ ∞

∞ ∞

∞ ∞

∞ ∞ ∞ ∞

∞

∞ ∞ ∞ ∞

Table 6.3 Domains and Ranges of the Inverse 
Hyperbolic Functions 

The graphs of the inverse hyperbolic functions are shown in the following figure. 



650     6 • Applications of Integration

Figure 6.82 Graphs of the inverse hyperbolic functions. 
To find the derivatives of the inverse functions, we use implicit differentiation. We have 

Recall that  so  Then, 

We can derive differentiation formulas for the other inverse hyperbolic functions in a similar fashion. These 
differentiation formulas are summarized in the following table. 

Table 6.4 Derivatives of 
the Inverse Hyperbolic 
Functions 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.9 • Calculus of the Hyperbolic Functions     651

Table 6.4 Derivatives of 
the Inverse Hyperbolic 
Functions 

Note that the derivatives of  and  are the same. Thus, when we integrate  we need to select 
the proper antiderivative based on the domain of the functions and the values of  Integration formulas involving the 
inverse hyperbolic functions are summarized as follows. 

EXAMPLE 6.49 

Differentiating Inverse Hyperbolic Functions 
Evaluate the following derivatives: 

a. 
b. 

Solution 
Using the formulas in Table 6.4 and the chain rule, we obtain the following results: 

a. 

b. 

 6.49 Evaluate the following derivatives: 

a. 
b. 

EXAMPLE 6.50 

Integrals Involving Inverse Hyperbolic Functions 
Evaluate the following integrals: 



652     6 • Applications of Integration

a. 

b. 

Solution 
We can use  in both cases. 
a. Let  Then,  and we have 

b. Let  Then,  and we obtain 

 6.50 Evaluate the following integrals: 

a. 

b. 

Applications 
One physical application of hyperbolic functions involves hanging cables. If a cable of uniform density is suspended 
between two supports without any load other than its own weight, the cable forms a curve called a catenary. High-
voltage power lines, chains hanging between two posts, and strands of a spider’s web all form catenaries. The following 
figure shows chains hanging from a row of posts. 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.9 • Calculus of the Hyperbolic Functions     653

Figure 6.83 Chains between these posts take the shape of a catenary. (credit: modification of work by 
OKFoundryCompany, Flickr) 
Hyperbolic functions can be used to model catenaries. Specifically, functions of the form  are catenaries. 
Figure 6.84 shows the graph of 

Figure 6.84 A hyperbolic cosine function forms the shape of a catenary. 

EXAMPLE 6.51 

Using a Catenary to Find the Length of a Cable 
Assume a hanging cable has the shape  for  where  is measured in feet. Determine the 
length of the cable (in feet). 



654     6 • Applications of Integration

Solution 
Recall from Section  that the formula for arc length is 

We have  so  Then 

Now recall that  so we have 

 6.51 Assume a hanging cable has the shape  for  Determine the length of the cable 
(in feet). 

 SECTION 6.9 EXERCISES 
377. [T] Find expressions for  378 . From the definitions of  379 . Show that  and 

 and  and  find  satisfy 
 Use a their antiderivatives. 

calculator to graph these 
functions and ensure your 
expression is correct. 

380. Use the quotient rule to  381 . Derive  382 . Take the derivative of the 
verify that previous expression to 

from the definition. find an expression for 

383. Prove  384 . Take the derivative of the 
previous expression to 

by changing the expression to exponentials. find an expression for 

For the following exercises, find the derivatives of the given functions and graph along with the function to ensure your 
answer is correct. 

385. [T]  386 . [T]  387 . [T] 

388. [T]  389 . [T]  390 . [T] 

391. [T]  392 . [T]  393 . [T] 

394. [T] 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.9 • Calculus of the Hyperbolic Functions     655

For the following exercises, find the antiderivatives for the given functions. 

395.  396 .  397 . 

398.  399 .  400 . 

401.  402 .  403 . 

404. 

For the following exercises, find the derivatives for the functions. 

405.  406 .  407 . 

408.  409 .  410 . 

411. 

For the following exercises, find the antiderivatives for the functions. 

412.  413 .  414 . 

415.  416 .  417 . 

418. 

For the following exercises, use the fact that a falling body with friction equal to velocity squared obeys the equation 

419. Show that  420 . Derive the previous  421 . [T] Estimate how far a 
expression for  by body has fallen in 

satisfies this equation. integrating seconds by finding the 
area underneath the 
curve of 

For the following exercises, use this scenario: A cable hanging under its own weight has a slope  that satisfies 
 The constant  is the ratio of cable density to tension. 

422. Show that  423 . Integrate  424 . Sketch the cable and 
satisfies this equation.  to find determine how far down 

the cable height  if it sags at 

For the following exercises, solve each problem. 
425. [T] A chain hangs from  426 . [T] A chain hangs from  427 . [T] A high-voltage power 

two posts  m apart to two posts four meters line is a catenary 
form a catenary described apart to form a catenary described by 
by the equation described by the equation  Find 

 Find  Find the ratio of the area 
the slope of the catenary the total length of the under the catenary to its 
at the left fence post. catenary (arc length). arc length. What do you 

notice? 



656     6 • Applications of Integration

428. A telephone line is a  429 . Prove the formula for the  430 . Prove the formula for the 
catenary described by derivative of derivative of 

 Find the  by  by 
ratio of the area under differentiating differentiating 
the catenary to its arc  (Hint: Use 
length. Does this confirm hyperbolic trigonometric (Hint: Use hyperbolic 
your answer for the identities.) trigonometric identities.) 
previous question? 

431. Prove the formula for the  432 . Prove that 
derivative of 

 by 
differentiating 

 (Hint: Use 
hyperbolic trigonometric 
identities.) 

433. Prove the expression for  434 . Prove the expression for 
 Multiply  Multiply 

by  and solve for  Does by  and solve for  Does 
your expression match the your expression match the 
textbook? textbook? 

Access for free at openstax.org



6 • Chapter Review     657

Chapter Review 
Key Terms 
arc length  the arc length of a curve can be thought of as the distance a person would travel along the path of the 

curve 
catenary  a curve in the shape of the function  is a catenary; a cable of uniform density suspended 

between two supports assumes the shape of a catenary 
center of mass  the point at which the total mass of the system could be concentrated without changing the moment 
centroid  the centroid of a region is the geometric center of the region; laminas are often represented by regions in the 

plane; if the lamina has a constant density, the center of mass of the lamina depends only on the shape of the 
corresponding planar region; in this case, the center of mass of the lamina corresponds to the centroid of the 
representative region 

cross-section  the intersection of a plane and a solid object 
density function  a density function describes how mass is distributed throughout an object; it can be a linear density, 

expressed in terms of mass per unit length; an area density, expressed in terms of mass per unit area; or a volume 
density, expressed in terms of mass per unit volume; weight-density is also used to describe weight (rather than 
mass) per unit volume 

disk method  a special case of the slicing method used with solids of revolution when the slices are disks 
doubling time  if a quantity grows exponentially, the doubling time is the amount of time it takes the quantity to 

double, and is given by 
exponential decay  systems that exhibit exponential decay follow a model of the form 
exponential growth  systems that exhibit exponential growth follow a model of the form 
frustum  a portion of a cone; a frustum is constructed by cutting the cone with a plane parallel to the base 
half-life  if a quantity decays exponentially, the half-life is the amount of time it takes the quantity to be reduced by half. 

It is given by 
Hooke’s law  this law states that the force required to compress (or elongate) a spring is proportional to the distance 

the spring has been compressed (or stretched) from equilibrium; in other words,  where  is a constant 
hydrostatic pressure  the pressure exerted by water on a submerged object 
lamina  a thin sheet of material; laminas are thin enough that, for mathematical purposes, they can be treated as if 

they are two-dimensional 
method of cylindrical shells  a method of calculating the volume of a solid of revolution by dividing the solid into 

nested cylindrical shells; this method is different from the methods of disks or washers in that we integrate with 
respect to the opposite variable 

moment  if n masses are arranged on a number line, the moment of the system with respect to the origin is given by 

 if, instead, we consider a region in the plane, bounded above by a function  over an interval 

 then the moments of the region with respect to the x- and y-axes are given by  and 

 respectively 

slicing method  a method of calculating the volume of a solid that involves cutting the solid into pieces, estimating the 
volume of each piece, then adding these estimates to arrive at an estimate of the total volume; as the number of 
slices goes to infinity, this estimate becomes an integral that gives the exact value of the volume 

solid of revolution  a solid generated by revolving a region in a plane around a line in that plane 
surface area  the surface area of a solid is the total area of the outer layer of the object; for objects such as cubes or 

bricks, the surface area of the object is the sum of the areas of all of its faces 
symmetry principle  the symmetry principle states that if a region R is symmetric about a line l, then the centroid of R 

lies on l 
theorem of Pappus for volume  this theorem states that the volume of a solid of revolution formed by revolving a 

region around an external axis is equal to the area of the region multiplied by the distance traveled by the centroid of 
the region 

washer method  a special case of the slicing method used with solids of revolution when the slices are washers 
work  the amount of energy it takes to move an object; in physics, when a force is constant, work is expressed as the 

product of force and distance 



658     6 • Chapter Review

Key Equations 

Area between two curves, integrating on the x-axis 

Area between two curves, integrating on the y-axis 

Disk Method along the x-axis 

Disk Method along the y-axis 

Washer Method 

Method of Cylindrical Shells 

Arc Length of a Function of x 

Arc Length of a Function of y 

Surface Area of a Function of x 

Mass of a one-dimensional object 

Mass of a circular object 

Work done on an object 

Hydrostatic force on a plate 

Mass of a lamina 

Moments of a lamina 

Center of mass of a lamina 

Access for free at openstax.org



6 • Chapter Review     659

Natural logarithm function  Z 

Exponential function  Z 

Key Concepts 
6.1 Areas between Curves 

• Just as definite integrals can be used to find the area under a curve, they can also be used to find the area between 
two curves. 

• To find the area between two curves defined by functions, integrate the difference of the functions. 
• If the graphs of the functions cross, or if the region is complex, use the absolute value of the difference of the 

functions. In this case, it may be necessary to evaluate two or more integrals and add the results to find the area of 
the region. 

• Sometimes it can be easier to integrate with respect to y to find the area. The principles are the same regardless of 
which variable is used as the variable of integration. 

6.2 Determining Volumes by Slicing 
• Definite integrals can be used to find the volumes of solids. Using the slicing method, we can find a volume by 

integrating the cross-sectional area. 
• For solids of revolution, the volume slices are often disks and the cross-sections are circles. The method of disks 

involves applying the method of slicing in the particular case in which the cross-sections are circles, and using the 
formula for the area of a circle. 

• If a solid of revolution has a cavity in the center, the volume slices are washers. With the method of washers, the 
area of the inner circle is subtracted from the area of the outer circle before integrating. 

6.3 Volumes of Revolution: Cylindrical Shells 
• The method of cylindrical shells is another method for using a definite integral to calculate the volume of a solid of 

revolution. This method is sometimes preferable to either the method of disks or the method of washers because 
we integrate with respect to the other variable. In some cases, one integral is substantially more complicated than 
the other. 

• The geometry of the functions and the difficulty of the integration are the main factors in deciding which integration 
method to use. 

6.4 Arc Length of a Curve and Surface Area 
• The arc length of a curve can be calculated using a definite integral. 
• The arc length is first approximated using line segments, which generates a Riemann sum. Taking a limit then gives 

us the definite integral formula. The same process can be applied to functions of 
• The concepts used to calculate the arc length can be generalized to find the surface area of a surface of revolution. 
• The integrals generated by both the arc length and surface area formulas are often difficult to evaluate. It may be 

necessary to use a computer or calculator to approximate the values of the integrals. 

6.5 Physical Applications 
• Several physical applications of the definite integral are common in engineering and physics. 
• Definite integrals can be used to determine the mass of an object if its density function is known. 
• Work can also be calculated from integrating a force function, or when counteracting the force of gravity, as in a 

pumping problem. 
• Definite integrals can also be used to calculate the force exerted on an object submerged in a liquid. 

6.6 Moments and Centers of Mass 
• Mathematically, the center of mass of a system is the point at which the total mass of the system could be 

concentrated without changing the moment. Loosely speaking, the center of mass can be thought of as the 
balancing point of the system. 

• For point masses distributed along a number line, the moment of the system with respect to the origin is 

 For point masses distributed in a plane, the moments of the system with respect to the x- and 



660     6 • Chapter Review

y-axes, respectively, are  and  respectively. 
• For a lamina bounded above by a function  the moments of the system with respect to the x- and y-axes, 

respectively, are  and 

• The x- and y-coordinates of the center of mass can be found by dividing the moments around the y-axis and around 
the x-axis, respectively, by the total mass. The symmetry principle says that if a region is symmetric with respect to a 
line, then the centroid of the region lies on the line. 

• The theorem of Pappus for volume says that if a region is revolved around an external axis, the volume of the 
resulting solid is equal to the area of the region multiplied by the distance traveled by the centroid of the region. 

6.7 Integrals, Exponential Functions, and Logarithms 
• The earlier treatment of logarithms and exponential functions did not define the functions precisely and formally. 

This section develops the concepts in a mathematically rigorous way. 
• The cornerstone of the development is the definition of the natural logarithm in terms of an integral. 
• The function  is then defined as the inverse of the natural logarithm. 
• General exponential functions are defined in terms of  and the corresponding inverse functions are general 

logarithms. 
• Familiar properties of logarithms and exponents still hold in this more rigorous context. 

6.8 Exponential Growth and Decay 
• Exponential growth and exponential decay are two of the most common applications of exponential functions. 
• Systems that exhibit exponential growth follow a model of the form 
• In exponential growth, the rate of growth is proportional to the quantity present. In other words, 
• Systems that exhibit exponential growth have a constant doubling time, which is given by 
• Systems that exhibit exponential decay follow a model of the form 
• Systems that exhibit exponential decay have a constant half-life, which is given by 

6.9 Calculus of the Hyperbolic Functions 
• Hyperbolic functions are defined in terms of exponential functions. 
• Term-by-term differentiation yields differentiation formulas for the hyperbolic functions. These differentiation 

formulas give rise, in turn, to integration formulas. 
• With appropriate range restrictions, the hyperbolic functions all have inverses. 
• Implicit differentiation yields differentiation formulas for the inverse hyperbolic functions, which in turn give rise to 

integration formulas. 
• The most common physical applications of hyperbolic functions are calculations involving catenaries. 

Review Exercises 
True or False? Justify your answer with a proof or a counterexample. 
435. The amount of work to  436 . If the force is constant,  437 . The disk method can be 

pump the water out of a the amount of work to used in any situation in 
half-full cylinder is half move an object from which the washer method 
the amount of work to  to  is is successful at finding 
pump the water out of the volume of a solid of 
the full cylinder. revolution. 

438. If the half-life of 
 is 

ms, then 

Access for free at openstax.org



6 • Chapter Review     661

For the following exercises, use the requested method to determine the volume of the solid. 

439. The volume that has a  440 . The region bounded by  441 .  and 
base of the ellipse the curve rotated around the y-axis 

 and and the x-axis from using the washer method 
cross-sections of an  rotated 
equilateral triangle around the y-axis using 
perpendicular to the the washer method 

 Use the method of 
slicing. 

442. 
rotated around the x-axis 
using cylindrical shells 

For the following exercises, find 
a. the area of the region, 
b. the volume of the solid when rotated around the x-axis, and 
c. the volume of the solid when rotated around the y-axis. Use whichever method seems most appropriate to you. 

443.  444 .  445 . [T] 

446.  and  447 .    448 . Below  and 
and above 

449. Find the mass of  450 . Find the center of mass  451 . Find the mass and the 
 on a disk for  on center of mass of 

centered at the origin on the region bounded by 
with radius  and 

For the following exercises, find the requested arc lengths. 
452. The length of  for  453 . The length of  for 

 from  from  to 

For the following exercises, find the surface area and volume when the given curves are revolved around the specified 
axis. 
454. The shape created by  455 . The loudspeaker created  456 . For this exercise, consider 

revolving the region by revolving  from the Karun-3 dam in Iran. 
between  to  around the Its shape can be 

  and x-axis. approximated as an 
 rotated around the inverted isosceles triangle 

y-axis. spanning across the river, 
with height 205 m and 
width (across the top of 
the dam) 388 m. Assume 
the current depth of the 
water is 180 m. The 
density of water is 1000 
kg/m3. Find the total force 
on the wall of the dam. 



662     6 • Chapter Review

457. You are a crime scene 
investigator attempting to 
determine the time of 
death of a victim. It is 
noon and  outside 
and the temperature of 
the body is  You 
know the cooling 
constant is 

When did the victim die, 
assuming that a human’s 
temperature is  ? 

For the following exercise, consider the stock market crash in  in the United States. The table lists the Dow Jones 
industrial average per year leading up to the crash. 

Years after 1920 Value ($) 

Source: http://stockcharts.com/
freecharts/historical/
djia19201940.html 

458. [T] The best-fit 
exponential curve to 
these data is given by 

 Why 
do you think the gains of 
the market were 
unsustainable? Use first 
and second derivatives to 
help justify your answer. 
What would this model 
predict the Dow Jones 
industrial average to be in 

 ? 

Access for free at openstax.org



6 • Chapter Review     663

For the following exercises, consider the catenoid, the only solid of revolution that has a minimal surface, or zero mean 
curvature. A catenoid in nature can be found when stretching soap between two rings. 
459. Find the volume of the catenoid  from 

 that is created by rotating this curve 
around the  as shown here. 

460. Find surface area of the catenoid 
from  to  that is created by rotating 
this curve around the 



664     6 • Chapter Review

Access for free at openstax.org



A • Table of Integrals     665

A TABLE OF INTEGRALS 
Basic Integrals 
1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

8. 

9. 

10. 

11. 

12. 

13. 

14. 

15. 

16. 

17. 

Trigonometric Integrals 
18. 

19. 

20. 

21. 



666     A • Table of Integrals

22. 

23. 

24. 

25. 

26. 

27. 

28. 

29. 

30. 

31. 

32. 

33. 

34. 

35. 

36. 

37. 

38. 

39. 

40. 

41. 

Exponential and Logarithmic Integrals 
42. 

43. 

Access for free at openstax.org



A • Table of Integrals     667

44. 

45. 

46. 

47. 

48. 

Hyperbolic Integrals 
49. 

50. 

51. 

52. 

53. 

54. 

55. 

56. 

57. 

58. 

Inverse Trigonometric Integrals 
59. 

60. 

61. 

62. 

63. 

64. 

65. 



668     A • Table of Integrals

66. 

67. 

Integrals Involving a2 + u2, a > 0 
68. 

69. 

70. 

71. 

72. 

73. 

74. 

75. 

76. 

Integrals Involving u2 − a2, a > 0 
77. 

78. 

79. 

80. 

81. 

82. 

83. 

84a. 

84b. 

Access for free at openstax.org



A • Table of Integrals     669

Integrals Involving a2 − u2, a > 0 
85. 

86. 

87. 

88. 

89. 

90. 

91. 

92. 

93a. 

93b. 

Integrals Involving 2au − u2, a > 0 
94. 

95. 

96. 

97. 

Integrals Involving a + bu, a ≠ 0 
98. 

99. 

100. 

101. 

102. 

103. 



670     A • Table of Integrals

104. 

105. 

106. 

107. 

108. 

109. 

110. 

111. 

112. 

113. 

Access for free at openstax.org



B • Table of Derivatives     671

B TABLE OF DERIVATIVES 
General Formulas 
1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

8. 

Trigonometric Functions 
9. 

10. 

11. 

12. 

13. 

14. 

Inverse Trigonometric Functions 
15. 

16. 

17. 

18. 

19. 

20. 

Exponential and Logarithmic Functions 
21. 

22. 

23. 

24. 

Hyperbolic Functions 
25. 

26. 



672     B • Table of Derivatives

27. 

28. 

29. 

30. 

Inverse Hyperbolic Functions 
31. 

32. 

33. 

34. 

35. 

36. 

Access for free at openstax.org



C • Review of Pre-Calculus     673

C REVIEW OF PRE-CALCULUS 
Formulas from Geometry 

  

Formulas from Algebra 
Laws of Exponents 

Special Factorizations 

Quadratic Formula 
If  then 

Binomial Theorem 

where 



674     C • Review of Pre-Calculus

Formulas from Trigonometry 
Right-Angle Trigonometry 

Trigonometric Functions of Important Angles 

— 

Fundamental Identities 

Law of Sines 

Access for free at openstax.org



C • Review of Pre-Calculus     675

Law of Cosines 

Addition and Subtraction Formulas 

Double-Angle Formulas 

Half-Angle Formulas 



676     C • Review of Pre-Calculus

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     677

Answer Key 
Chapter 1 
Checkpoint 
1.1  and 
1.2 Domain =  range = 
1.3 
1.4  The domain is 
1.5 
1.6 
1.7  is odd. 
1.8 Domain = ∞ ∞  range = 
1.9  The point-slope form is 

The slope-intercept form is 

1.10 The zeros are  The parabola opens upward. 
1.11 The domain is the set of real numbers  such that  The range is the set 
1.12 The domain of  is  The domain of  is 
1.13 Algebraic 
1.14 

1.15 

1.16 Shift the graph  to the left 1 unit, reflect about the -axis, then shift down 4 units. 
1.17  330° 
1.18 
1.19  ft 
1.20  for 

1.21 

1.22 To graph  the graph of  needs to be compressed horizontally by a factor of 4, then 
stretched vertically by a factor of 3, then shifted down 5 units. The function  will have a period of  and an 



678     Answer Key

amplitude of 3. 
1.23 No. 
1.24  The domain of  is  The range of  is 
1.25 

1.26 The domain of  is ∞  The range of  is ∞  The inverse function is given by the formula 

1.27 
1.28 
1.29  After  years, there will be approximately 
1.30 
1.31 
1.32 
1.33 The magnitude  earthquake is roughly  times as severe as the magnitude  earthquake. 
1.34 
1.35 

Section 1.1 Exercises 
1 . a. Domain =  range =  b. Yes, a function 
3 . a. Domain =  range =  b. No, not a function 
5 . a. Domain =  range =  b. Yes, a function 
7 . a.  b. 3 c. 13 d.  e.  f. 
9 . a. Undefined b. 2 c.  d.  e  f. 

11 . a.  b.  c.  d.  e.  f. 
13 . a. 9 b. 9 c. 9 d. 9 e. 9 f. 9 
15 .  no y-intercept 
17 . 
19 .  no x-intercept; 
21 .  no intercepts 
23 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     679

25 . 

27 . 



680     Answer Key

29 . Function; a. Domain: all real numbers, range:  b.  c.  d.  and ∞  e. 
∞  and  f. Not constant g. y-axis h. Even 

31 . Function; a. Domain: all real numbers, range:  b.  c.  d.  e. None f. Not 
constant g. Origin h. Odd 

33 . Function; a. Domain: ∞ ∞  range:  b.  c.  d.  e. Not decreasing f. 
∞  and ∞  g. Origin h. Odd 

35 . Function; a. Domain:  range:  b.  c.  d. Not increasing e.  f. 
 g. No Symmetry h. Neither 

37 . a.  all real numbers b.  all real numbers c.  all real numbers d. 
39 . a.  all real numbers b.  all real numbers c.  all real 

numbers d. 
41 . a.  b. 6;  c.  d. 
43 . a.  all real numbers b.  all real numbers 
45 . a.  all real numbers b.  all real numbers 
47 . a.  b. 
49 . a. Yes, because there is only one winner for each year. b. No, because there are three teams that won more than 

once during the years 2001 to 2012. 
51 . a.  b.  a cube of side length 11.8 each has a volume of approximately 1643 cubic units. 
53 . a.  b. i.  therefore, the vehicle can travel 300 mi on a full tank of gas. Ii. 

 therefore, the vehicle can travel 225 mi on 3/4 of a tank of gas. c. Domain:  range: 
 d. The driver had to stop at least once, given that it takes approximately 39 gal of gas to drive a total of 

578 mi. 
55 . a.  b. Exact:  approximately 95 cm2 c.  d. 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     681

Exact:  approximately 35 cm 
57 . a.  b. $962.50, $1090, $1217.50 c. 77 skateboards 

Section 1.2 Exercises 
59 . a. −1 b. Decreasing 
61 . a. 3/4 b. Increasing 
63 . a. 4/3 b. Increasing 
65 . a. 0 b. Horizontal 
67 . 
69 . 
71 . 
73 . 
75 . a.  b. 

77 . a.  b. 

79 . a.  b. 



682     Answer Key

81 . a.  b. 

83 . a. 2 b.  c. −5 d. As  e. Neither 
85 . a. 2 b.  c. −1 d. As  e. Even 
87 . a. 3 b. 0,  c. 0 d. As  and  e. Odd 
89 . 

91 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     683

93 . 

95 . a.  b. 



684     Answer Key

97 . a.  b. 

99 . True; 
101. False;  where  is a real-valued constant, is a power function 
103. a.  b.  means that the initial purchase price of the equipment is $20,500; 

 means that in 7.5 years the computer equipment has no value. c. $6835 d. In approximately 6.4 years 
105. a.  b. $245 c. 167 cupcakes 
107. a.  b. In 4 years, the value of the car is $20,000. 
109. $30,337.50 
111. 96% of the total capacity 

Section 1.3 Exercises 
113. 
115. 
117. 
119. 
121. 
123. 
125. 

127. 

129. a.  b. 
131. a.  b. 
133. a.  b. 
135. a.  b. 

137. a.  b. 
139. 
141. 
143. 
145. 
155. 
157. 
159. 
161. 
163. 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     685

165. 
167. a. 1 b.  c.  units to the right 
169. a.  b.  c. No phase shift 
171. a. 3 b.  c.  units to the left 
173. Approximately 42 in. 
175. a. 0.550 rad/sec b. 0.236 rad/sec c. 0.698 rad/min d. 1.697 rad/min 
177. 
179. a. π/184; the voltage repeats every π/184 sec b. Approximately 59 periods 
181. a. Amplitude =  b.  c. 14 hours later, or 2 p.m. d. 

Section 1.4 Exercises 
183. Not one-to-one 
185. Not one-to-one 
187. One-to-one 
189. a.  b. Domain 
191. a.  b. Domain: all real numbers, range: all real numbers 
193. a.  b. Domain:  range: 
195. 

197. 



686     Answer Key

199. These are inverses. 
201. These are not inverses. 
203. These are inverses. 
205. These are inverses. 
207. 
209. 
211. 

213. 
215. 
217. a.  b. The inverse function determines the distance from the center of the artery at 

which blood is flowing with velocity V. c. 0.1 cm; 0.14 cm; 0.17 cm 
219. a. $31,250, $66,667, $107,143 b.  c. 34 ppb 
221. a.  b.  c. 
223.  so, the temperature occurs on June 21 and August 15 
225. 
227.  the expression does not equal 2.1 since —in other words, it is not in 

the restricted domain of  since 2.1 is in the restricted domain of 

Section 1.5 Exercises 
229. a. 125 b. 2.24 c. 9.74 
231. a. 0.01 b. 10,000 c. 46.42 
233. d 
235. b 
237. e 
239. Domain: all real numbers, range: ∞

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     687

241. Domain: all real numbers, range: ∞

243. Domain: all real numbers, range: ∞



688     Answer Key

245. Domain: all real numbers, range: ∞

247. 
249. 
251. 
253. 
255. 
257. 
259. 
261. 
263. 
265. Domain: ∞  range: ∞ ∞

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     689

267. Domain: ∞  range: ∞ ∞

269. Domain: ∞  range: ∞ ∞



690     Answer Key

271. 
273. 
275. 
277. 
279. 
281. 
283. 
285. 
287. 
289. 
291. 
293. 

295. 

297. 
299. 
301. Approximately $131,653 is accumulated in 5 years. 
303. i. a. pH = 8 b. Base ii. a. pH = 3 b. Acid iii. a. pH = 4 b. Acid 
305. a.  million b. 94 years from 2013, or in 2107 
307. a.  b.  hours 
309. The San Francisco earthquake was  times more intense than the Japanese earthquake. 

Review Exercises 
311. False 
313. False 
315. Domain:  range: all real numbers 
317. Domain:  and  range: all real numbers 
319. Degree of 3, -intercept: 0, zeros: 0, 

321. 

323. 
325. 4 
327. One-to-one; yes, the function has an inverse; inverse: 
329. 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     691

331. a.  b. 100 shirts 
333. The population is less than 20,000 from December 8 through January 23 and more than 140,000 from May 29 

through August 2 
335. 78.51% 

Chapter 2 
Checkpoint 
2.1 2.25 
2.2 12.006001 
2.3 17 unit2 

2.4 
2.5 

2.6  does not exist. 

2.7 a.  b. 

2.8 a. ∞  b. ∞  c. ∞
2.9 a. ∞  b. ∞  c.  DNE. The line  is the vertical asymptote of 

2.10 Does not exist. 
2.11 
2.12 −13; 
2.13 
2.14 
2.15 −1; 
2.16 
2.17 

2.18 +∞ 
2.19 0 
2.20 0 
2.21 f is not continuous at 1 because 
2.22  is continuous at every real number. 
2.23 Discontinuous at 1; removable 



692     Answer Key

2.24 ∞
2.25 0 
2.26  is continuous over  It must have a zero on this interval. 
2.27 Let  choose  assume 

Thus, 
Therefore, 

2.28 Choose 
2.29 
2.30 

Section 2.1 Exercises 
1 . a. 2.2100000; b. 2.0201000; c. 2.0020010; d. 2.0002000; e. (1.1000000, 2.2100000); f. (1.0100000, 2.0201000); g. 

(1.0010000, 2.0020010); h. (1.0001000, 2.0002000); i. 2.1000000; j. 2.0100000; k. 2.0010000; l. 2.0001000 
3 . 
5 . 3 
7 . a. 2.0248457; b. 2.0024984; c. 2.0002500; d. 2.0000250; e. (4.1000000,2.0248457); f. (4.0100000,2.0024984); g. 

(4.0010000,2.0002500); h. (4.00010000,2.0000250); i. 0.24845673; j. 0.24984395; k. 0.24998438; l. 0.24999844 
9 . 

11 . π 
13 . a. −0.95238095; b. −0.99009901; c. −0.99502488; d. −0.99900100; e. (−1;.0500000,−0;.95238095); f. 

(−1;.0100000,−0;.9909901); g. (−1;.0050000,−0;.99502488); h. (1.0010000,−0;.99900100); i. −0.95238095; j. 
−0.99009901; k. −0.99502488; l. −0.99900100 

15 . 
17 . −49 m/sec (velocity of the ball is 49 m/sec downward) 
19 . 5.2 m/sec 
21 . −9.8 m/sec 
23 . 6 m/sec 
25 . Under, 1 unit2; over: 4 unit2. The exact area of the two triangles is 

27 . Under, 0.96 unit2; over, 1.92 unit2. The exact area of the semicircle with radius 1 is  unit2. 
29 . Approximately 1.3333333 unit2 

Section 2.2 Exercises 
31 .  does not exist because 

33 . 
35 . a. 1.98669331; b. 1.99986667; c. 1.99999867; d. 1.99999999; e. 1.98669331; f. 1.99986667; g. 1.99999867; h. 

1.99999999; 

37 . 
39 . a. −0.80000000; b. −0.98000000; c. −0.99800000; d. −0.99980000; e. −1.2000000; f. −1.0200000; g. −1.0020000; h. 

−1.0002000; 
41 . a. −37.931934; b. −3377.9264; c. −333,777.93; d. −33,337,778; e. −29.032258; f. −3289.0365; g. −332,889.04; h. 

−33,328,889 ∞
43 . a. 0.13495277; b. 0.12594300; c. 0.12509381; d. 0.12500938; e. 0.11614402; f. 0.12406794; g. 0.12490631; h. 

0.12499063; 

45 . a. 10.00000; b. 100.00000; c. 1000.0000; d. 10,000.000; Guess: ∞  actual: DNE 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     693

47 . False; 

49 . False;  DNE since  and 

51 . 2 
53 . 1 
55 . 1 
57 . DNE 
59 . 0 
61 . DNE 
63 . 2 
65 . 3 
67 . DNE 
69 . 0 
71 . −2 
73 . DNE 
75 . 0 
77 . Answers may vary. 

79 . Answers may vary. 



694     Answer Key

81 . a.  b.  c. DNE unless  As you approach  from the left, you are in the high-density area of the shock. 
When you approach from the right, you have not experienced the “shock” yet and are at a lower density. 

Section 2.3 Exercises 
83 . Use constant multiple law and difference law: 

85 . Use root law: 

87 . 49 
89 . 1 
91 . 
93 .  then, 

95 .  then, 

97 .  then, 

99 .  then, 

101.  then, 
103. −∞ 
105. −∞ 
107. 

109. 

111. 

113. 

115. 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     695

a. 9; b. 7 
117. 

a. 1; b. 1 
119. 

121. 

123. 

125. 

127. The limit is zero. 



696     Answer Key

129. a. 

b. ∞. The magnitude of the electric field as you approach the particle q becomes infinite. It does not make 
physical sense to evaluate negative distance. 

Section 2.4 Exercises 
131. The function is defined for all x in the interval ∞
133. Removable discontinuity at  infinite discontinuity at 
135. Infinite discontinuity at 
137. Infinite discontinuities at  for 
139. No. It is a removable discontinuity. 
141. Yes. It is continuous. 
143. Yes. It is continuous. 
145. 
147. 
149. 
151. Since both s and  are continuous everywhere, then  is continuous everywhere and, in 

particular, it is continuous over the closed interval  Also,  and  Therefore, by the 
IVT, there is a value  such that 

153. The function  is continuous over the interval  and has opposite signs at the 
endpoints. 

155. a. 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     697

b. It is not possible to redefine  since the discontinuity is a jump discontinuity. 
157. Answers may vary; see the following example: 

159. Answers may vary; see the following example: 



698     Answer Key

161. False. It is continuous over ∞ ∞
163. False. Consider 

165. False. IVT only says that there is at least one solution; it does not guarantee that there is exactly one. Consider 
 on 

167. False. The IVT does not work in reverse! Consider  over the interval 
169. 
171. 
173. For all values of  is defined,  exists, and  Therefore,  is continuous 

everywhere. 
175. Nowhere 

Section 2.5 Exercises 
177. For every  there exists a  so that if  then 
179. For every  there exists a  so that if  then 
181. 
183. 
185. 
187. 
189. Let  If  then 
191. Let  If  then 
193. Let  If  then 
195. Let  If  then 
197. Let  If  then 
199. The engineer must cut within 0.328 cm of 12 cm on each side; 
201. Answers may vary. 
203. 0 

205. 

207. Answers may vary. 

Review Exercises 
209. False 
211. False. A removable discontinuity is possible. 
213. 5 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     699

215. 
217. DNE 
219. 
221. −4; 
223. Since  then  Since  it follows that 

225. ∞
227. 
229. 
231. 

Chapter 3 
Checkpoint 
3.1 
3.2 
3.3 
3.4  ft/s 
3.5  raise prices 
3.6 
3.7 ∞
3.8  and 
3.9 
3.10 
3.11 0 
3.12 
3.13 
3.14 
3.15 
3.16 
3.17 
3.18 
3.19 
3.20 
3.21 
3.22 left to right 
3.23 3,300 
3.24 $2 
3.25 
3.26 
3.27 
3.28 
3.29 
3.30 
3.31 
3.32 
3.33  and  The block is speeding up. 
3.34 
3.35 
3.36 
3.37 
3.38 



700     Answer Key

3.39 
3.40 
3.41 
3.42 
3.43 
3.44 
3.45 
3.46 

3.47 
3.48 

3.49 
3.50 
3.51 996 
3.52 
3.53 
3.54 
3.55 

Section 3.1 Exercises 
1 . 
3 . 
5 . 
7 . 
9 . 

11 . a.  b. 
13 . a.  b. 
15 . a.  b. 
17 . a.  b. 
19 . a.  b. 
21 . 
23 . 
25 . 
27 . 
29 . 
31 . a.       

     b.  c. 
33 . a.      b.  c. 
35 . a.  b.  m/s,  m/s,  m/s,  m/s; c.  m/s 
37 . a.  b.  m/s,  m/s,  m/s,  m/s; c.  m/s 
39 . a.  b. 
41 . ∞
43 . 

45 . a.  ft/s,  ft/s  ft/s  ft/s b. At  seconds the race car is traveling at a 
rate/velocity of  ft/s. 

47 . a. The vehicle represented by  because it has traveled  feet, whereas  has traveled  foot. b. The velocity 
of  is constant at  ft/s, while the velocity of  is approximately  ft/s. c. The vehicle represented by 
with a velocity of approximately  ft/s. d. Both have traveled  feet in  seconds. 

49 . a. 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     701

b. 
51 . a.  b.  gallons. When the vehicle travels  miles, it has used  gallons of gas. c.  The rate of 

gas consumption in gallons per mile that the vehicle is achieving after having traveled  miles. 
53 . a. 

b. 

Section 3.2 Exercises 
55 . 
57 . 
59 . 

61 . 
63 . 
65 . 



702     Answer Key

67 . 

69 . 
71 . 
73 . 
75 . a. 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     703

b. 

77 . a. 

b. 

79 . a.  b. 
81 . 
83 . 
85 . 



704     Answer Key

87 . 

89 . 

91 . a. Average rate at which customers spent on concessions in thousands per customer. b. Rate (in thousands per 
customer) at which  customers spent money on concessions in thousands per customer. 

93 . a. Average grade received on the test with an average study time between two values. b. Rate (in percentage 
points per hour) at which the grade on the test increased or decreased for a given average study time of  hours. 

95 . a. Average change of atmospheric pressure between two different altitudes. b. Rate (torr per foot) at which 
atmospheric pressure is increasing or decreasing at  feet. 

97 . a. The rate (in degrees per foot) at which temperature is increasing or decreasing for a given height  b. The rate 
of change of temperature as altitude changes at  feet is  degrees per foot. 

99 . a. The rate at which the number of people who have come down with the flu is changing  weeks after the initial 
outbreak. b. The rate is increasing sharply up to the third week, at which point it slows down and then becomes 
constant. 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     705

101. 
Time (seconds) 

103. 

105.  represent the acceleration of the rocket, with units of 
meters per second squared 

Section 3.3 Exercises 
107. 
109. 
111. 

113. 

115. 



706     Answer Key

117. 

119. 

121. 

123. 
125. 

127. 
129. Undefined 
131. a.  b. does not exist, c. 
133. a. 23, b. 

135. a. 3, b. 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     707

137. 
139. 
141. 
143. 
145.  or 0.0992 ft/s 
147. a.  b.  mg/L-hr, −0.01344 mg/L-hr, −0.003566 mg/L-hr, −0.001579 mg/L-hr c. The rate at 

which the concentration of drug in the bloodstream decreases is slowing to 0 as time increases. 
149. a.  b.  N/m 

Section 3.4 Exercises 
151. a.  b. speeds up ∞  slows down 
153. a.  b. 
155. a. 5 ft/s b. 9 ft/s 
157. a. 84 ft/s, −84 ft/s b. 84 ft/s c.  d.  in both cases e.  f. 
159. a. Velocity is positive on  negative on  and zero on  b. 

c. Acceleration is positive on  negative on  and zero on  d. The object is speeding up on 
 and slowing down on 

161. a.  b.  c. $6 per item, $0 per item 
163. a.  b.  c.  At a production level of 1000 cordless 

drills, revenue is increasing at a rate of $83 per drill; at a production level of 4000 cordless drills, revenue is 
decreasing at a rate of $97 per drill. d.  e.  At a 



708     Answer Key

production level of 1000 cordless drills, profit is increasing at a rate of $18 per drill; at a production level of 4000 
cordless drills, profit is decreasing at a rate of $162 per drill. 

165. a.  b.  c. The bacteria population increases from time 0 to 10 

hours; afterwards, the bacteria population decreases. d.  The rate at which the bacteria is 
increasing is decreasing during the first 10 hours. Afterwards, the bacteria population is decreasing at a 
decreasing rate. 

167. a.  b.  The population is increasing. c.  The rate at which the 
population is increasing is constant. 

169. a.  b.  This is the velocity of the sensor. c. 
 This is the acceleration of the sensor; it is a constant acceleration downward. 

171. a. 

b.  The more increase in prey, the more growth for predators. c.  As the amount of prey 
increases, the rate at which the predator population growth increases is constant. d. This equation assumes that 
if there is more prey, the predator is able to increase consumption linearly. This assumption is unphysical because 
we would expect there to be some saturation point at which there is too much prey for the predator to consume 
adequately. 

173. a. 

b.  When the amount of prey increases, the predator growth increases. c. 

 When the amount of prey is extremely small, the rate at which predator growth is 

increasing is increasing, but when the amount of prey reaches above a certain threshold, the rate at which 
predator growth is increasing begins to decrease. d. At lower levels of prey, the prey is more easily able to avoid 
detection by the predator, so fewer prey individuals are consumed, resulting in less predator growth. 

Section 3.5 Exercises 
175. 
177. 
179. 
181. 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     709

183. 
185. 

187. 

189. 

191. 
193. 
195. 
197. 
199. 
201. 
203.  increasing on  and 
209. 
211. 
213. 

Section 3.6 Exercises 
215. 



710     Answer Key

217. 
219. 

221. a.  b. 
223. a.  b. 
225. a.  b. 
227. a.  b. 
229. 

231. 
233. 
235. 
237. 
239. 
241. 
243. 
245. 10 
247. 
249. 
251. 
253. a.  m/s, b.  m/s2, c. The train is slowing down since velocity and acceleration have opposite signs. 
255. a.  b.  c. Approximately $90,300 per week 
257. a.  b. The volume is decreasing at a rate of  ft3/min. 
259.  ft/hr 

Section 3.7 Exercises 
261. a. 

b. 
263. a. 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     711

b. 

265. a. 6, b.  c. 
267. a.  b.  c. 
269. 
271. 
273. 
275. a.  b. 
277. a.  b. 
279. 

281. 

283. 
285. 

287. 

289. 
291. 
293. 
295. a.  b.  c.  d. The hockey puck is 

decelerating/slowing down at 2, 4, and 6 seconds. 
297.  radians per foot 
299. a.  b.  c. As a person moves farther away from the screen, the viewing 

angle is increasing, which implies that as he or she moves farther away, his or her screen vision is widening. d. 
 e. As the person moves beyond 20 feet from the screen, the viewing angle is 

decreasing. The optimal distance the person should stand for maximizing the viewing angle is 20 feet. 

Section 3.8 Exercises 
301. 
303. 

305. 

307. 



712     Answer Key

309. 
311. 

313. 

315. 

317. a.  b. 
319. a.  b.  c. They are parallel since the slope is the same at both intercepts. 
321. 
323. a.  b. When $81 is spent on labor and $16 is spent on capital, the amount spent on capital is decreasing 

by $0.5926 per $1 spent on labor. 
325. 
327. 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     713

329. 

Section 3.9 Exercises 
331. 
333. 
335. 

337. 
339. 
341. 
343. 
345. 
347. 
349. 
351. 

353. 

355. 

357. a.  b. 
359. a.  individuals b.  individuals per year c.  individuals per year 
361. a. At the beginning of 1960 there were 5.3 thousand cases of the disease in New York City. At the beginning of 

1964 there were approximately 723 cases of the disease in the United States. b. At the beginning of 1960 the 
number of cases of the disease was decreasing at rate of  thousand per year; at the beginning of 1963, the 
number of cases of the disease was decreasing at a rate of  thousand per year. 

363. 
365. 

Years since 1790 

0 69.25 

10 107.5 

20 167.0 

30 259.4 

40 402.8 

50 625.5 



714     Answer Key

Years since 1790 

60 971.4 

70 1508.5 

Review Exercises 
367. False. 
369. False 
371. 

373. 
375. 
377. 
379. 

381. 
383. 
385. 
387. 

389.  At 3 a.m. the tide is decreasing at a rate of 1.518 ft/hr. 
391.  The wind speed is decreasing at a rate of 7.5 mph/hr 

Chapter 4 
Checkpoint 
4.1  or approximately 0.0044 cm/sec 
4.2 
4.3 
4.4 
4.5  2.00833 
4.6 
4.7 
4.8 
4.9  
4.10 The volume measurement is accurate to within 
4.11 7.6% 
4.12  
4.13 The absolute maximum is  and it occurs at  The absolute minimum is  and it occurs at 
4.14 
4.15  sec 

4.16  has a local minimum at  and a local maximum at 
4.17  has no local extrema because  does not change sign at 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     715

4.18  is concave up over the interval ∞  and concave down over the interval ∞
4.19  has a local maximum at  and a local minimum at 
4.20 Both limits are  The line  is a horizontal asymptote. 
4.21 Let  Let  Therefore, for all  we have 

Therefore, 
∞

4.22 Let  Let  Then, for all  we have 

4.23 ∞
4.24 
4.25 
4.26  

∞ ∞
4.27 

4.28 



716     Answer Key

4.29 
4.30 The function  has a cusp at  ∞  ∞  For end behavior, ∞

∞
4.31 The maximum area is 
4.32  The domain is 

4.33 
4.34 The company should charge  per car per day. 
4.35  The domain of consideration is 
4.36  dollars 
4.37 
4.38 
4.39  Therefore, we cannot apply L’Hôpital’s rule. The limit of the quotient is ∞
4.40 
4.41 
4.42 
4.43 
4.44 The function  grows faster than 
4.45 
4.46 
4.47 
4.48 
4.49 
4.50 
4.51 
4.52 
4.53 

Section 4.1 Exercises 
1 . 
3 . 

5 .  ft/sec 
7 . The distance is decreasing at 
9 . The distance between them shrinks at a rate of 

11 .  ft/sec 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     717

13 . It grows at a rate  ft/sec 

15 . The distance is increasing at  ft/sec 
17 .  m/sec 
19 .  m2/sec 
21 .  cm 

23 . The area is increasing at a rate 
25 . The depth of the water decreases at  ft/min. 
27 . The volume is decreasing at a rate of 
29 . The water flows out at rate 
31 .  m/sec 
33 .  ft/min 
35 .  ft/min 
37 . The angle decreases at 
39 . 
41 . The angle is changing at a rate of 
43 . The distance is increasing at a rate of  ft/sec. 
45 . The distance is decreasing at a rate of  ft/sec. 

Section 4.2 Exercises 
47 . 
49 . The linear approximation exact when  is linear or constant. 
51 . 
53 . 
55 . 
57 . 0.02 
59 . 
61 . 
63 .  error, 
65 .  error, 
67 .  error, 
69 . 
71 . 

73 .  

75 .  

77 .  
79 . 
81 . 
83 . 
85 .  ft3 

Section 4.3 Exercises 
91 . Answers may vary 
93 . Answers will vary 
95 . No; answers will vary 
97 . Since the absolute maximum is the function (output) value rather than the x value, the answer is no; answers will 

vary 
99 . When 
101. Absolute minimum at 3; Absolute maximum at −2.2; local minima at −2, 1; local maxima at −1, 2 



718     Answer Key

103. Absolute minima at −2, 2; absolute maxima at −2.5, 2.5; minima at –2, 0, and 2 (Note: –2 and 2 are both local and 
absolute minima); local maxima at −1, 1 

105. Answers may vary. 
107. Answers may vary. 
109. 
111. None 
113. 
115. None 
117. 
119. Absolute maximum:   absolute minimum:  
121. Absolute minimum:  
123. Absolute maximum:   absolute minimum:  
125. Absolute maximum:  and  absolute minimum:  
127. Absolute maximum:   absolute minimum:  
129. Absolute minimum:  
131. Absolute minimum:   local maximum:   local minimum:  
133. Local maximum:   local minimum:  
135. Absolute maximum:   absolute minimum:  
137. Local maximum:   local minimum:  
139. Absolute maximum:   absolute minimum:  
141.  
143. The absolute minimum was in 1848, when no gold was produced. 
145. Absolute minima:    local maximum at  
147. No maxima/minima if  is odd, minimum at  if  is even 

Section 4.4 Exercises 
149. One example is 
151. Yes, but the Mean Value Theorem still does not apply 
153. Any closed interval in ∞ ∞
155. Any closed interval in ∞ ∞
157. 2 points 
159. 5 points 
161. 
163. 
165. 
167. Not differentiable 
169. Not differentiable 
171. Yes 
173. The Mean Value Theorem does not apply since the function is discontinuous at 
175. Yes 
177. The Mean Value Theorem does not apply; discontinuous at 
179. Yes 
181. The Mean Value Theorem does not apply; not differentiable at 
183. 

185.  

187. The Mean Value Theorem does not apply. 
189.  

191. Yes 
193. Let  represent the distance of Car 1 from Stoplight 1 at time . Let  represent the distance of Car 2 from 

Stoplight 1 at time . Then . Let  represent the time that the cars arrive at Stoplight 2. Then 
 where  is the distance between the stoplights. 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     719

Define a new function . Then . By the Mean Value Theorem, there is a time 
 such that 

At time c, 

So, at time c, Car 1 and Car 2 are traveling at the same speed. 

Section 4.5 Exercises 
195. It is not a local maximum/minimum because  does not change sign 
197. No 
199. False; for example, 
201. Increasing for  and  decreasing for  and 
203. Decreasing for  increasing for 
205. Decreasing for  and  increasing for  and  and 
207. a. Increasing over  decreasing over   b. maxima at 

 and  minima at  and  and 
209. a. Increasing over  decreasing over  b. Minimum at 
211. Concave up on all  no inflection points 
213. Concave up on all  no inflection points 
215. Concave up for  and  concave down for  inflection points at  and 
217. Answers will vary 
219. Answers will vary 
221. a. Increasing over  decreasing over  b. Local maximum at  local minimum at 

223. a. Concave up for  concave down for  b. Inflection point at 
225. a. Increasing over  and  decreasing over  b. Maximum at  minimum at  c. 

Concave up for  concave down for  d. Infection point at 
227. a. Increasing over  and  decreasing over  b. Minimum at , local maximum at x = 0 

c. Concave down for  concave up for  d. Inflection point at 
229. a. Increasing over  decreasing over  b. Minimum at  c. Concave up for all  d. No 

inflection points 
231. a. Increases over  decreases over  and  b. Minimum at  maximum at  c. 

Concave up for  concave down for  and  d. Inflection points at 
233. a. Increasing for all  b. No local minimum or maximum c. Concave up for  concave down for  d. 

Inflection point at 
235. a. Increasing for all  where defined b. No local minima or maxima c. Concave up for  concave down for 

 d. No inflection points in domain 
237. a. Increasing over  decreasing over  b. Minimum at  maximum at 

c. Concave up for  concave down for  d. Infection points at 
239. a. Increasing over  decreasing over  b. Minimum at  c. Concave up for 

concave down for  d. Inflection point at 
241. 
243. 
245. 
247. True, by the Mean Value Theorem 
249. True, examine derivative 

Section 4.6 Exercises 
251. 



720     Answer Key

253. 
255. 
257. Yes, there is a vertical asymptote 
259. Yes, there is vertical asymptote 
261. 
263. ∞
265. 
267. 
269. 
271. Horizontal: none, vertical: 
273. Horizontal: none, vertical: 
275. Horizontal: none, vertical: none 
277. Horizontal:  vertical: 
279. Horizontal:  vertical:  and 
281. Horizontal:  vertical: 
283. Horizontal: none, vertical: none 
285. Answers will vary, for example: 
287. Answers will vary, for example: 
289. 
291. ∞
293. 
295. 

297. 

299. 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     721

301. 

303. 

305. 



722     Answer Key

307. 
309. ∞

Section 4.7 Exercises 
311. The critical points can be the minima, maxima, or neither. 
313. False;  has a minimum only 
315.  in. 
317. 
319. 
321. 
323. 
325. 
327. 

329. 
331. approximately 
333. 
335. 
337. Maximal:  minimal:  and 
339. Maximal:  minimal: none 
341. 

343. 
345. 
347. 
349. 
351. 
353. 
355. 

Section 4.8 Exercises 
357. ∞
359. 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     723

361. 
363. Cannot apply directly; use logarithms 
365. Cannot apply directly; rewrite as 
367. 
369. 
371. 
373. 
375. 
377. 
379. 
381. 
383. 
385. 
387. 
389. 
391. ∞
393. 
395. 
397. 
399. 
401. 
403. 
405. 

Section 4.9 Exercises 
407. 

409. 
411.  fails,  works 
413. 
415. a.  b. 
417. a.  b. 
419. a.  b. 
421. a.  b. 
423. 
425. 
427. 
429. 
431. 
433. 
435. 
437. We need  to be twice continuously differentiable. 
439. 
441. 
443. 
445. 
447. There is no solution to the equation. 
449. It enters a cycle. 
451. 
453. 
455. Newton:  iterations, secant:  iterations 
457. Newton: three iterations, secant: six iterations 
459. Newton: five iterations, secant: eight iterations 
461. 



724     Answer Key

463. 

Section 4.10 Exercises 
465. 
467. 
469. 
471. 
473. 
475. 
477. 
479. 
481. 
483. 
485. 
487. 
489. 
491. 
493. 
495. 
497. 
499. 
501. 
503. 
505. Answers may vary; one possible answer is 
507. Answers may vary; one possible answer is 
509.  sec 
511.  sec 
513.  ft/sec2 

515. 
517. 
519. 
521. True 
523. False 

Review Exercises 
525. True, by Mean Value Theorem 
527. True 
529. Increasing: ∞  decreasing: ∞
531. 
533. Critical point:  absolute minimum:  absolute maximum: 
535. Increasing: ∞  decreasing: ∞  concave up: 

∞ ∞  concave down: 

537. Increasing: ∞  decreasing:  concave up: ∞  concave down: nowhere 
539. 
541. 
543. 
545. 
547. 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     725

Inflection points: none; critical points:  zeros: none; vertical asymptotes:   horizontal 
asymptote: 

549. The height is decreasing at a rate of  m/sec 
551.  feet 

Chapter 5 
Checkpoint 

5.1 

5.2 15,550 
5.3 440 
5.4 The left-endpoint approximation is 0.7595. The right-endpoint approximation is 0.6345. 

5.5 a. 
b. 



726     Answer Key

5.6 
5.7 6 
5.8 18 square units 
5.9 6 
5.10 18 

5.11 

5.12 −7 
5.13 3 
5.14 
5.15 
5.16 
5.17 
5.18 
5.19 
5.20 Kathy still wins, but by a much larger margin: James skates 24 ft in 3 sec, but Kathy skates 29.3634 ft in 3 sec. 
5.21 
5.22 Net displacement:  total distance traveled:  m 
5.23 17.5 mi 
5.24 

5.25 

5.26 
5.27 
5.28 
5.29 
5.30 

5.31 

5.32 

5.33 

5.34 

5.35  There are 20,099 bacteria in the dish after 3 hours. 
5.36 There are 116 flies. 

5.37 

5.38 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     727

5.39 
5.40 
5.41 
5.42 
5.43 
5.44 

Section 5.1 Exercises 
1 . a. They are equal; both represent the sum of the first 10 whole numbers. b. They are equal; both represent the sum 

of the first 10 whole numbers. c. They are equal by substituting  d. They are equal; the first sum factors 
the terms of the second. 

3 . 
5 . 
7 . 

9 . ​

11 . ​
13 . 
15 . 
17 . 
19 . 
21 .  The graph of f is a triangle with area 9. 
23 .  They are equal. 

25 . 

27 . 

29 . 

 The plot shows that the left Riemann sum is an underestimate because the 
function is increasing. Similarly, the right Riemann sum is an overestimate. The area lies between the left and right 
Riemann sums. Ten rectangles are shown for visual clarity. This behavior persists for more rectangles. 



728     Answer Key

31 . 

 The left endpoint sum is an underestimate because the function is 
increasing. Similarly, a right endpoint approximation is an overestimate. The area lies between the left and right 
endpoint estimates. 

33 . 

 The plot shows that the left Riemann sum is an underestimate because the function is 
increasing. Ten rectangles are shown for visual clarity. This behavior persists for more rectangles. 

35 . The sum represents the cumulative rainfall in January 2009. 

37 . The total mileage is 

39 . Add the numbers to get 8.1-in. net increase. 
41 . 309,389,957 
43 . 
45 . 
47 . 
49 .  and  By symmetry of the graph, the exact 

area is zero. 
51 . 
53 . If  is a subinterval of  under one of the left-endpoint sum rectangles, then the area of the rectangle 

contributing to the left-endpoint estimate is  But,  for  so the area under the 
graph of f between c and d is  plus the area below the graph of f but above the horizontal line segment 
at height  which is positive. As this is true for each left-endpoint sum interval, it follows that the left Riemann 
sum is less than or equal to the area below the graph of f on 

55 .  and 

The left sum has a term corresponding to  and the right sum has a term corresponding to  In 
 any term corresponding to  occurs once with a plus sign and once with a minus sign, 

so each such term cancels and one is left with 

57 . Graph 1: a.  b.  Graph 2: a.  b.  Graph 3: a. 
 b. 

59 . Let A be the area of the unit circle. The circle encloses n congruent triangles each of area  so 
 Similarly, the circle is contained inside n congruent triangles each of area 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     729

 so  As 

∞  so we conclude  Also, as ∞  so 

we also have  By the squeeze theorem for limits, we conclude that 

Section 5.2 Exercises 

61 . 

63 . 

65 . 

67 . 

69 . 

71 . 
73 . 
75 . 
77 . The integral is the area of the triangle, 
79 . The integral is the area of the triangle, 9. 
81 . The integral is the area 
83 . The integral is the area of the “big” triangle less the “missing” triangle, 
85 . 
87 . 

89 . 

91 . 

93 . 

95 . The integrand is odd; the integral is zero. 
97 . The integrand is antisymmetric with respect to  The integral is zero. 
99 . 

101. 

103. 
105. The integrand is negative over 
107.  over  so  over 
109.  Multiply by the length of the interval to get the inequality. 
111. 
113.  when 
115. 
117.  the exact average is between these values. 
119. 
121.  The exact answer  so L100 is not accurate. 
123.  The exact answer  so L100 is not 

accurate to first decimal. 

125. Use  Then, 



730     Answer Key

127.  so divide by the length 2π of the interval.  has period π, so yes, it is true. 

129. The integral is maximized when one uses the largest interval on which p is nonnegative. Thus, 

and 
131. If  for some  then since  is continuous, there is an interval containing t0 such that 

 over the interval  and then  over this interval. 

133. The integral of f over an interval is the same as the integral of the average of f over that interval. Thus, 

Dividing through by  gives the desired identity. 

135. 

137.  so the estimate is accurate to two decimal places. 
139. The average is  which is equal to the integral in this case. 
141. a. The graph is antisymmetric with respect to  over  so the average value is zero. b. For any value of a, 

the graph between  is a shift of the graph over  so the net areas above and below the axis do not 
change and the average remains zero. 

143. Yes, the integral over any interval of length 1 is the same. 

Section 5.3 Exercises 
145. Yes. It is implied by the Mean Value Theorem for Integrals. 
147.  average value of  over  is 
149. 
151. 

153. 
155. 
157. 
159. 
161. a. f is positive over  and  negative over  and  and zero over  and  b. The 

maximum value is 2 and the minimum is −3. c. The average value is 0. 
163. a. ℓ is positive over  and  and negative over  b. It is increasing over  and  and it is 

constant over  and  c. Its average value is 

165. 

167. 

169. 

171. 
173. 
175. 
177. 
179. 
181. 
183. 
185. 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     731

187. 
189. 
191. 
193. 

195. 

197. 

199. a. The average is  since  has period 12 and integral 0 over any period. Consumption is equal 
to the average when  when  and when  b. Total consumption is the average rate times 
duration:  c. 

201. If f is not constant, then its average is strictly smaller than the maximum and larger than the minimum, which are 
attained over  by the extreme value theorem. 

203. a.  b. 

205. Mean gravitational force = 

Section 5.4 Exercises 

207. 

209. 

211. 

213.  so  and 

215. 

217. With p as in the previous exercise, each of the 12 pentagons increases in area from 2p to 4p units so the net 
increase in the area of the dodecahedron is 36p units. 

219. 

221. 

223.  The total distance is 

225.  For  For 

 The total distance is 

227.  m/s 
229. The net increase is 1 unit. 
231. At  the height of water is  The net change in height from  to  is 

 m. 
233. The total daily power consumption is estimated as the sum of the hourly power rates, or 911 gW-h. 
235. 17 kJ 
237. a. 54.3%; b. 27.00%; c. The curve in the following plot is 



732     Answer Key

239. In dry conditions, with initial velocity  m/s,  and, if  In wet conditions, if 
 and  and if 

241. 225 cal 
243. 
245. a. 

b. Between 600 and 1000 the average decrease in vehicles per hour per lane is −0.0075. Between 1000 and 1500 it 
is −0.006 per vehicles per hour per lane, and between 1500 and 2100 it is −0.04 vehicles per hour per lane. c. 

The graph is nonlinear, with minutes per mile increasing dramatically as vehicles per hour per lane reach 2000. 

247. 

249. Average acceleration is  mph/s 
251. 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     733

253. 

Section 5.5 Exercises 
255. 
257. 

259. 

261. 
263. 

265. 
267. 
269. 

271. 
273. 

275. 

277. 
279. 
281. 

283. 

285. 
287. 
289.  The exact area is 
291.  … The exact area is 0. 

293. 

295. 

297. 

299. 



734     Answer Key

The antiderivative is  Since the antiderivative is not continuous at  one cannot find a value 
of C that would make  work as a definite integral. 

301. 

The antiderivative is  You should take  so that 
303. 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     735

The antiderivative is  One should take 
305. No, because the integrand is discontinuous at 

307.  the integral becomes 

309.  the integral becomes 

311.  the integral becomes 

since the integrand is odd. 

313. Setting  and  gets you 

315.  As  the limit is  if 

 and the limit diverges to +∞ if 

317. 

319. 

Section 5.6 Exercises 
321. 
323. 
325. 
327. 



736     Answer Key

329. 
331. 
333. 
335. 

337. 
339. 
341. 
343. 
345. 

347. 

349. 
351. 
353. 
355. 
357. 
359. 
361. 
363. 
365. 
367. Exact solution:  Since f is decreasing, the right endpoint estimate underestimates the area. 
369. Exact solution:  Since f is increasing, the right endpoint estimate overestimates the 

area. 
371. Exact solution:  Since f is negative and increasing on the interval, the right-endpoint 

estimate overestimates the value of the integral, but it underestimates the area of the region (absolute value of 
the integral). 

373. 
375. 

377.  The quantity is less than 0.01 when 

379. 

381. 23 

383. We may assume that  Then,  Now make the substitution  so  and 

 and change endpoints: 

385. Answers will vary. 
387.  Then,  Since any number t can be written  for some x, and for 

such t we have  it follows that for any 
389. 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     737

Section 5.7 Exercises 

391. 

393. 

395. 

397. 
399. 
401. 
403.  So,  They differ by a constant. 
405.  is not defined as a real number when 
407. 

The antiderivative is  Taking  recovers the definite integral. 
409. 



738     Answer Key

The antiderivative is  Taking  recovers the definite integral. 

411. 
413. 
415. 
417. 

The antiderivative is  Taking  recovers the definite integral over 
419. 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     739

The general antiderivative is  Taking  recovers the definite integral. 
421. 

The general antiderivative is  Taking ∞  recovers the definite integral. 
423. 
425. 
427. 
429. 
431. 

433.  as ∞
435. Using the hint, one has  Set  Then,  and the 

integral is  If one uses the identity 

 then this can also be written 

437.  The left endpoint estimate with  is 4.781 and these decimals persist for 

Review Exercises 
439. False 
441. True 
443.  exact answer: 4 
445.  exact answer: 5.870 
447. 
449. 1 
451. 
453. 



740     Answer Key

455. 

457. 
459. $6,328,113 
461. $73.36 
463. 

Chapter 6 
Checkpoint 
6.1  units2 

6.2  unit2 

6.3  units2 

6.4  units2 

6.5  units2 

6.7 
6.8  units3 

6.9  units3 

6.10  units3 

6.11  units3 

6.12  units3 

6.13  units3 

6.14  units3 

6.15  units3 

6.16  units3 

6.17 Use the method of washers; 

6.18 
6.19 
6.20 
6.21 
6.22 
6.23 
6.24 
6.25  ft-lb 
6.26 Approximately  ft-lb 
6.27  N 
6.28 Approximately 7,164,520,000 lb or 3,582,260 t 
6.29 
6.30  m 
6.31 The centroid of the region is 
6.32 The centroid of the region is 
6.33 The centroid of the region is 
6.34  units3 

6.35 a. 

b. 

6.36 

6.37 
6.38 a. 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     741

b. 

6.39 

6.40 a. 
b. 

6.41 

6.42 There are  bacteria in the population after  hours. The population reaches  million bacteria after 
 minutes. 

6.43 At  interest, she must invest  At  interest, she must invest 
6.44  months 
6.45 The coffee is first cool enough to serve about  minutes after it is poured. The coffee is too cold to serve about 

 minutes after it is poured. 
6.46 A total of  g of carbon remains. The artifact is approximately  years old. 
6.47 a. 

b. 

6.48 a. 

b. 

6.49 a. 

b. 

6.50 a. 

b. 

6.51 

Section 6.1 Exercises 
1 . 
3 . 
5 . 
7 . 

243 square units 
9 . 



742     Answer Key

4 
11 . 

13 . 

15 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     743

17 . 

19 . 

21 . 



744     Answer Key

23 . 

25 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     745

27 . 

29 . 

31 . 

33 . 

35 . 



746     Answer Key

37 . 

39 . 
41 . 
43 . 
45 . 
47 . 
49 .  total profit for  cell phones sold 
51 .  mi represents how far ahead the hare is from the tortoise 
53 . 
55 . 
57 . 

Section 6.2 Exercises 
63 . 8 units3 

65 .  units3 

67 .  units3 

69 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     747

 units3 

71 . 

 units3 

73 . 

 units3 

75 . 



748     Answer Key

 units3 

77 . 

 units3 

79 . 

 units3 

81 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     749

 units3 

83 . 

 units3 

85 . 

 units3 

87 . 

 units3 

89 . 



750     Answer Key

 units3 

91 . 

 units3 

93 . 

 units3 

95 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     751

 units3 

97 . 

 units3 

99 . 

 units3 

101. 

 units3 

103.  units3 

105.  units3 

107.  units3 

109.  units3 

111.  units3 

113.  units3 



752     Answer Key

Section 6.3 Exercises 
115. 

 units3 

117. 

 units3 

119. 

 units3 

121.  units3 

123.  units3 

125.  units3 

127.  units3 

129.  units3 

131.  units3 

133. 
135. 
137. 
139. 
141. 
143.  units3 

145.  units3 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     753

147.  units3 

149.  units3 

151. 

 units3 

153. 

 units3 

155. 

 units3 

157. 

 units3 



754     Answer Key

159.  units3 

161.  units3 

163.  units3 

Section 6.4 Exercises 
165. 
167. 
169. 

171. 
173. 
175. 
177. 
179. 
181. 
183. 

185. 
187. 
189. 
191. 
193. 
195. 
197. 
199. 
201. 
203. 
205. 
207. 
209. 
211.  ft 
213. 
215. Answers may vary 
217. For more information, look up Gabriel’s Horn. 

Section 6.5 Exercises 
219.  ft-lb 
221. 
223.  J 
225. 
227. 
229. 
231. 
233. 
235.  J 
237.  cm 
239.  J 
241.  ft-lb 
243. Weight 

Work 
245. 
247. a.  lb, b.  lbs 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     755

249.  million ft-lb 
251. 
253. Answers may vary 

Section 6.6 Exercises 
255. 
257. 
259. 
261. 
263. 
265. 

267. 
269. 
271. 
273. 
275. 
277. 
279. 
281. 
283. 
285. 
287. 
289. 
291. Center of mass:  volume: 
293. Volume: 

Section 6.7 Exercises 
295. 
297. 
299. 
301. 
303. 
305. 
307. 
309. 
311. 
313. 
315. 
317. 
319. 
321. 

323. 
325. 
327. 
329. 
331. 
333. 
335. 



756     Answer Key

337. 
339. 
341. 

Section 6.8 Exercises 
349. True 
351. True; 
353.  hours 
355. No. The relic is approximately  years old. 
357.  years 
359.  days  hours  minutes 
361. 
363. 
365. 
367.  hours  minutes 
369.  years 
371.  The population is always increasing. 
373. The population reaches  billion people in 
375.  The population is always increasing. 

Section 6.9 Exercises 
377. 
379. Answers may vary 
381. Answers may vary 
383. Answers may vary 
385. 
387. 
389. 

391. 

393. 
395. 
397. 
399. 
401. 
403. 
405. 

407. 

409. 
411. 

413. 
415. 
417. 
419. Answers may vary 
421. 
423. 
425. 
427. 

Review Exercises 
435. False 
437. False 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     757

439. 
441. 
443. a.  b.  c. 
445. a.  b.  c. 
447. a.  b.  c. 
449. 
451. Mass:  center of mass: 
453. 

455. Volume:  surface area: 

457. 11:02 a.m. 
459. 



758     Answer Key

Access for free at openstax.org



Index     759

Index 
A definite integral  456 H 
absolute extremum  318 degree  34 half-life  642 
absolute maximum  318 density function  595 hanging cables  652 
absolute minimum  318 dependent variable  8 higher-order derivatives  210 
absolute value function  23 derivative  193 Holling type I equation  240 
acceleration  197, 230 derivative function  203 Hooke’s law  599 
algebraic function  40 Difference law for limits  141 Hoover Dam  606 
amount of change  231 difference quotient  189 horizontal asymptote  355 
antiderivative  420 Difference Rule  219 horizontal line test  66 
aphelion  487 differentiable at  203 hydrostatic pressure  603 
arc length  582 differentiable function  203 hyperbolic functions  89 
Archimedes  152, 438 differentiable on  203 
area density  596 Differential calculus  108 I 
Area Problem  110 differential form  312 iceboat  492 
area under the curve  448 differentials  312 implicit differentiation  269 
average rate of change  231 differentiation  193 increasing on the interval  17 
average value of the function  467 discontinuous at a point  157 indefinite integral  421 
average velocity  109, 195 disk method  557 independent variable  8 

displacement  461, 489 indeterminate forms  395 
B domain  8 index  438 
bald eagle  502 doubling time  640 infinite discontinuity  160 
base  80 dummy variable  438, 456 infinite limit at infinity  360 

infinite limits  126 
C E inflection point  345 
carbon dating  642 earthquake  88 initial-value problem  427 
catenary  652 end behavior  35, 361 input  8 
center of mass  611 endpoints  10 instantaneous rate of change  196 
centroid  614 epsilon-delta definition of the limit instantaneous velocity  109, 195 
chain rule  250 169 integrable function  456 
change of variables  507 evaluation theorem  478 Integral calculus  111 
chaos  415 even function  22, 493 integrand  456 
common logarithm  87 existential quantifier  169 integration by substitution  506 
composite function  19 exponent  80 interior points  215 
compound interest  638 exponential decay  640 Intermediate Value Theorem  164 
compounding interest  83 exponential growth  637 interval notation  10 
concave down  344 Extreme Value Theorem  318 intuitive definition of the limit  117 
concave up  344 inverse function  66 
concavity  344 F inverse hyperbolic functions  93 
concavity test  344 fave  467 inverse trigonometric functions  72 
conditional statement  169 federal income tax  502 iterative process  412 
constant function  34 Fermat’s theorem  321 
Constant multiple law for limits first derivative test  341 J 
141 folium of Descartes  273 joule  597 
Constant Multiple Rule  219 fruit flies  520 jump discontinuity  160 
constant rule  216 frustum  586 
continuity over an interval  162 function  8 L 
continuous at a point  157 Fundamental Theorem of Calculus L’Hôpital’s rule  394 
continuous from the left  162 473 lamina  614 
continuous from the right  162 Fundamental Theorem of Calculus, leading coefficient  34 
critical number  321 Part 1  475 left-endpoint approximation  442 
cross-section  551 Fundamental Theorem of Calculus, Leibniz  188, 456 
cubic function  34 Part 2  478 limit  109 

limit at infinity  355, 359 
D G limit laws  141 
deceleration  501 graph of a function  9 limits of integration  456 
decreasing on the interval  17 growth of bacteria  519 linear approximation  309 



760     Index

linear function  30 piecewise-defined function  43 solid of revolution  554 
linearization  309 piecewise-defined functions  10 speed  232 
local extremum  320 point-slope equation  32 spring constant  599 
local maximum  320 polynomial function  34 squeeze theorem  148 
local minimum  320 population growth  80, 637 standard form of a line  32 
logarithmic differentiation  282 population growth rates  230 Sum law for limits  141 
logarithmic function  42 power function  34 Sum Rule  219 
lower sum  449 Power law for limits  141 summation notation  438 

power rule  218 sums and powers of integers  440 
M price–demand function  517 Surface area  585 
Mandelbrot set  415 Product law for limits  141 symmetry about the origin  22 
marginal cost  234 product rule  221 symmetry about the y-axis  22 
marginal profit  234 propagated error  314 symmetry principle  614 
mathematical models  38 Pythagorean theorem  298 
maximizing revenue  386 T 
Mean Value Theorem  329 Q table of values  12 
Mean Value Theorem for Integrals quadratic function  34 tangent  108 
473 Quotient law for limits  141 tangent line approximation  309 
method of cylindrical shells.  572 quotient rule  223 Tangent Problem  108 
method of exhaustion  438 theorem of Pappus for volume 
moment  611 R 622 
multivariable calculus  112 radial density  596 total area  462 

radians  53 Tour de France  499 
N range  8 transcendental functions  42 
natural exponential function  84, rate of change  106, 489 transformation of a function  45 
276 rational function  40 triangle inequality  175 
natural logarithm  85 Regiomontanus’ problem  435 trigonometric functions  55 
natural logarithmic function  276 regular partition  442 trigonometric identity  58 
net change theorem  489 related rates  296 
net signed area  460 relative error  315 U 
Newton  188, 473 removable discontinuity  160 universal quantifier  169 
Newton’s law of cooling  641 restricted domain  71 upper sum  449 
Newton’s method  409 Richter scale  88 
number  84 Riemann sum  448 V 

right-endpoint approximation  443 variable of integration  456 
O Rolle’s theorem  329 velocity  489 
oblique asymptote  366 root function  40 vertical asymptote  128 
odd function  23, 493 Root law for limits  141 vertical line test  14 
one-sided limit  123 
one-to-one function  66 S W 
optimization problems  381 secant  107 washer method  562 
output  8 secant method  419 wingsuits  483 

second derivative test  347 work  598 
P sigma notation  438 
partition  442 simple interest  638 Z 
Pascal’s principle  604 skydiver  482 zeroes of functions  409 
pascals  603 slicing method  553 zeros of a function  14 
percentage error  315 slope  31 
perihelion  487 slope-intercept form  32 
periodic functions.  60 smooth  582 

Access for free at openstax.org



Index     761