Algebra and Trigonometry 2e 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SENIOR CONTRIBUTING AUTHOR 
JAY ABRAMSON, ARIZONA STATE UNIVERSITY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

	



	
OpenStax  
Rice  University  
6100 Main  Street  MS-375  
Houston,  Texas  77005  
 
To  learn  more about  OpenStax,  visit  https://openstax.org.  
Individual  print copies  and  bulk  orders  can  be  purchased  through  our  website.  
 
©2026  Rice Univer sity. T extb ook content  produced by Open Stax is lic ens ed under a C reative C ommo ns 
Attributio n Non-Com mercial ShareAlike 4.0 Inter national Lic ense (CC BY-NC-S A 4.0). U nde r this licen se, any  
user  of this  textb ook  or the  textbook  con ten ts herein  can share , remix , an d build  upon  the c onten t for   
noncom me rcial purposes o nly. Any adapta tions must be shared u nd er the s ame ty pe o f licen se. I n a ny case  of  
shar ing the  original  or adapted  material, wh ether in  whole or in  part, t he us er mu st p rovide pro per attr ibution 
as follows:    
 

- If you noncommercially redistribute this textbook in a digital format (including but not limited to PDF and
HTML), then you must retain on every page the following attribution:  
“Access for free at openstax.org.” 

- If you noncommercially redistribute this textbook in a print format, then you must include on every 
physical page the following attribution: 
“Access for free at openstax.org.” 

- If you noncommercially redistribute part of this textbook, then you must retain in every digital format 
page view (including but not limited to PDF and HTML) and on every physical printed page the following 
attribution:  
“Access for free at openstax.org.” 

- If you use this textbook as a bibliographic reference, please include https://openstax.org/details/books/	
algebra-and-trigonometry-2e in your citation. 

 
For questions regarding this licensing, please contact support@openstax.org. 
 
Trademarks 
The OpenStax name, OpenStax logo, OpenStax book covers, OpenStax CNX name, OpenStax CNX logo, 
OpenStax Tutor name, Openstax Tutor logo, Connexions name, Connexions logo, Rice University name, and 
Rice University logo are not subject to the license and may not be reproduced without the prior and express 
written consent of Rice University. 
 
Kendall Hunt and the Kendall Hunt Logo are trademarks of Kendall Hunt. The Kendall Hunt mark is registered 
in the United States, Canada, and the European Union. These trademarks may not be used without the prior 
and express written consent of Kendall Hunt. 
 
 

COLOR PAPERBACK BOOK ISBN-13 978-1-711494-04-3 
B&W PAPERBACK BOOK ISBN-13 978-1-711494-03-6 
DIGITAL VERSION ISBN-13 978-1-951693-40-4 
ORIGINAL PUBLICATION YEAR 2021 
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 RS 26 21  

  

	



	
OPENSTAX 
 
OpenStax provides free, peer-reviewed, openly licensed textbooks for introductory college and Advanced 
Placement® courses and low-cost, personalized courseware that helps students learn. A nonprofit ed tech 
initiative based at Rice University, we’re committed to helping students access the tools they need to complete 
their courses and meet their educational goals. 
 
RICE UNIVERSITY 
 
OpenStax is an initiative of Rice University. As a leading research university with a distinctive commitment to 
undergraduate education, Rice University aspires to path-breaking research, unsurpassed teaching, and 
contributions to the betterment of our world. It seeks to fulfill this mission by cultivating a diverse community 
of learning and discovery that produces leaders across the spectrum of human endeavor. 
 

 

 
PHILANTHROPIC SUPPORT 
 
OpenStax is grateful for the generous philanthropic partners who advance our mission to improve educational 
access and learning for everyone. To see the impact of our supporter community and our most updated list of 
partners, please visit openstax.org/foundation. 
 

Arnold Ventures Burt and Deedee McMurtry 
Chan Zuckerberg Initiative Michelson 20MM Foundation 
Chegg, Inc. National Science Foundation 
Arthur and Carlyse Ciocca Charitable Foundation The Open Society Foundations 
Digital Promise Jumee Yhu and David E. Park III 
Ann and John Doerr Brian D. Patterson USA-International Foundation 
Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation The Bill and Stephanie Sick Fund 
Girard Foundation Steven L. Smith & Diana T. Go 
Google Inc. Stand Together 
The William and Flora Hewlett Foundation Robin and Sandy Stuart Foundation 
The Hewlett-Packard Company The Stuart Family Foundation 
Intel Inc. Tammy and Guillermo Treviño 
Rusty and John Jaggers Valhalla Charitable Foundation 
The Calvin K. Kazanjian Economics Foundation White Star Education Foundation 
Charles Koch Foundation Schmidt Futures 
Leon Lowenstein Foundation, Inc. William Marsh Rice University 
The Maxfield Foundation  
  

	



Study where you want, what 
you want, when you want. 

When you access your book in our web view, you can use our new online 
highlighting and note-taking features to create your own study guides. 

Our books are free and flexible, forever. 
Get started at openstax.org/details/books/algebra-and-trigonometry-2e 

Access. The future of education. 
openstax.org          



Contents 

Preface 1 

1 Prerequisites 7 
Introduction to Prerequisites 7 
1.1 Real Numbers: Algebra Essentials 7 
1.2 Exponents and Scientific Notation 23 
1.3 Radicals and Rational Exponents 38 
1.4 Polynomials 48 
1.5 Factoring Polynomials 57 
1.6 Rational Expressions 66 
Chapter Review 74 
Exercises 77 

2 Equations and Inequalities 81 
Introduction to Equations and Inequalities 81 
2.1 The Rectangular Coordinate Systems and Graphs 81 
2.2 Linear Equations in One Variable 96 
2.3 Models and Applications 112 
2.4 Complex Numbers 122 
2.5 Quadratic Equations 131 
2.6 Other Types of Equations 145 
2.7 Linear Inequalities and Absolute Value Inequalities 157 
Chapter Review 167 
Exercises 170 

3 Functions 175 
Introduction to Functions 175 
3.1 Functions and Function Notation 175 
3.2 Domain and Range 198 
3.3 Rates of Change and Behavior of Graphs 216 
3.4 Composition of Functions 233 
3.5 Transformation of Functions 248 
3.6 Absolute Value Functions 279 
3.7 Inverse Functions 287 
Chapter Review 303 
Exercises 307 

4 Linear Functions 315 
Introduction to Linear Functions 315 
4.1 Linear Functions 315 
4.2 Modeling with Linear Functions 351 
4.3 Fitting Linear Models to Data 365 
Chapter Review 379 
Exercises 380 



5 Polynomial and Rational Functions 389 
Introduction to Polynomial and Rational Functions 389 
5.1 Quadratic Functions 389 
5.2 Power Functions and Polynomial Functions 408 
5.3 Graphs of Polynomial Functions 429 
5.4 Dividing Polynomials 450 
5.5 Zeros of Polynomial Functions 460 
5.6 Rational Functions 473 
5.7 Inverses and Radical Functions 498 
5.8 Modeling Using Variation 510 
Chapter Review 519 
Exercises 522 

6 Exponential and Logarithmic Functions 527 
Introduction to Exponential and Logarithmic Functions 527 
6.1 Exponential Functions 528 
6.2 Graphs of Exponential Functions 546 
6.3 Logarithmic Functions 559 
6.4 Graphs of Logarithmic Functions 569 
6.5 Logarithmic Properties 590 
6.6 Exponential and Logarithmic Equations 602 
6.7 Exponential and Logarithmic Models 614 
6.8 Fitting Exponential Models to Data 633 
Chapter Review 650 
Exercises 655 

7 The Unit Circle: Sine and Cosine Functions 665 
Introduction to The Unit Circle: Sine and Cosine Functions 665 
7.1 Angles 666 
7.2 Right Triangle Trigonometry 689 
7.3 Unit Circle 701 
7.4 The Other Trigonometric Functions 719 
Chapter Review 734 
Exercises 737 

8 Periodic Functions 741 
Introduction to Periodic Functions 741 
8.1 Graphs of the Sine and Cosine Functions 741 
8.2 Graphs of the Other Trigonometric Functions 760 
8.3 Inverse Trigonometric Functions 780 
Chapter Review 794 
Exercises 795 

9 Trigonometric Identities and Equations 801 
Introduction to Trigonometric Identities and Equations 801 
9.1 Verifying Trigonometric Identities and Using Trigonometric Identities to Simplify Trigonometric Expressions 

Access for free at openstax.org



801 
9.2 Sum and Difference Identities 811 
9.3 Double-Angle, Half-Angle, and Reduction Formulas 827 
9.4 Sum-to-Product and Product-to-Sum Formulas 839 
9.5 Solving Trigonometric Equations 846 
Chapter Review 862 
Exercises 865 

10 Further Applications of Trigonometry 869 
Introduction to Further Applications of Trigonometry 869 
10.1 Non-right Triangles: Law of Sines 869 
10.2 Non-right Triangles: Law of Cosines 887 
10.3 Polar Coordinates 901 
10.4 Polar Coordinates: Graphs 914 
10.5 Polar Form of Complex Numbers 933 
10.6 Parametric Equations 944 
10.7 Parametric Equations: Graphs 957 
10.8 Vectors 969 
Chapter Review 990 
Exercises 994 

11 Systems of Equations and Inequalities 1001 
Introduction to Systems of Equations and Inequalities 1001 
11.1 Systems of Linear Equations: Two Variables 1002 
11.2 Systems of Linear Equations: Three Variables 1020 
11.3 Systems of Nonlinear Equations and Inequalities: Two Variables 1031 
11.4 Partial Fractions 1043 
11.5 Matrices and Matrix Operations 1052 
11.6 Solving Systems with Gaussian Elimination 1065 
11.7 Solving Systems with Inverses 1078 
11.8 Solving Systems with Cramer's Rule 1093 
Chapter Review 1106 
Exercises 1109 

12 Analytic Geometry 1115 
Introduction to Analytic Geometry 1115 
12.1 The Ellipse 1116 
12.2 The Hyperbola 1132 
12.3 The Parabola 1148 
12.4 Rotation of Axes 1162 
12.5 Conic Sections in Polar Coordinates 1176 
Chapter Review 1188 
Exercises 1190 

13 Sequences, Probability, and Counting Theory 1195 
Introduction to Sequences, Probability and Counting Theory 1195 



13.1 Sequences and Their Notations 1195 
13.2 Arithmetic Sequences 1210 
13.3 Geometric Sequences 1221 
13.4 Series and Their Notations 1230 
13.5 Counting Principles 1243 
13.6 Binomial Theorem 1254 
13.7 Probability 1260 
Chapter Review 1271 
Exercises 1274 

A Proofs, Identities, and Toolkit Functions 1281 

Answer Key 1293 

Index 1453 

Access for free at openstax.org



Preface     1

Preface 
About OpenStax 
OpenStax is part of Rice University, which is a 501(c)(3) nonprofit charitable corporation. As an educational initiative, it’s 
our mission to improve educational access and learning for everyone. Through our partnerships with philanthropic 
organizations and our alliance with other educational resource companies, we’re breaking down the most common 
barriers to learning. Because we believe that everyone should and can have access to knowledge. 

About OpenStax Resource 
Customization 
Algebra and Trigonometry 2e is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 (CC BY 
NC-SA) license, which means that you can non-commercially distribute, remix, and build upon the content, as long as you 
provide attribution to OpenStax and its content contributors, and distribute all derivatives under the same license. 
Because our books are openly licensed, you are free to use the entire book or pick and choose the sections that are most 
relevant to the needs of your course. Feel free to remix the content by assigning your students certain chapters and 
sections in your syllabus, in the order that you prefer. You can even provide a direct link in your syllabus to the sections in 
the web view of your book. 
Instructors also have the option of creating a customized version of their OpenStax book. The custom version can be 
made available to students in low-cost print or digital form through their campus bookstore. Visit your book page on 
openstax.org for more information. 

Art attribution 
In Algebra and Trigonometry 2e, most photos and third-party illustrations contain attribution to their creator, rights 
holder, host platform, and/or license within the caption. For any art that is openly licensed, non-commercial users or 
organizations may reuse the art as long as they provide the same attribution to its original source. (Commercial entities 
should contact OpenStax to discuss reuse rights and permissions.) To maximize readability and content flow, some art 
does not include attribution in the text. If you reuse art from this text that does not have attribution provided, use the 
following attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY NC-SA 4.0 license. 

Errata 
All OpenStax textbooks undergo a rigorous review process. However, like any professional-grade textbook, errors 
sometimes occur. Since our books are web based, we can make updates periodically when deemed pedagogically 
necessary. If you have a correction to suggest, submit it through the link on your book page on openstax.org. Subject 
matter experts review all errata suggestions. OpenStax is committed to remaining transparent about all updates, so you 
will also find a list of past errata changes on your book page on openstax.org. 

Format 
You can access this textbook for free in web view or PDF through openstax.org, and for a low cost in print. 

About Algebra and Trigonometry 2e 
Algebra and Trigonometry 2e provides a comprehensive exploration of algebraic principles and meets scope and 
sequence requirements for a typical introductory algebra and trigonometry course. The modular approach and the 
richness of content ensures that the book meets the needs of a variety of courses. Algebra and Trigonometry 2e offers a 
wealth of examples with detailed, conceptual explanations, building a strong foundation in the material before asking 
students to apply what they’ve learned. 

Coverage and Scope 
In determining the concepts, skills, and topics to cover, we engaged dozens of highly experienced instructors with a 
range of student audiences. The resulting scope and sequence proceeds logically while allowing for a significant amount 
of flexibility in instruction. 
Chapters 1 and 2 provide both a review and foundation for study of functions that begins in Chapter 3. The authors 
recognize that while some institutions may find this material a prerequisite, other institutions have told us that they have 
a cohort that needs the prerequisite skills built into the course. 

Chapter 1: Prerequisites 
Chapter 2: Equations and Inequalities 

Chapters 3–6: The Algebraic Functions 



2     Preface

Chapter 3: Functions 
Chapter 4: Linear Functions 
Chapter 5: Polynomial and Rational Functions 
Chapter 6: Exponential and Logarithm Functions 

Chapters 7–10: A Study of Trigonometry 
Chapter 7: The Unit Circle: Sine and Cosine Functions 
Chapter 8: Periodic Functions 
Chapter 9: Trigonometric Identities and Equations 
Chapter 10: Further Applications of Trigonometry 

Chapters 11–13: Further Study in Algebra and Trigonometry 
Chapter 11: Systems of Equations and Inequalities 
Chapter 12: Analytic Geometry 
Chapter 13: Sequences, Probability, and Counting Theory 

Development Overview 
OpenStax Algebra and Trigonometry 2e is the product of a collaborative effort by a group of dedicated authors, editors, 
and instructors whose collective passion for this project has resulted in a text that is remarkably unified in purpose and 
voice. Special thanks is due to our Lead Author, Jay Abramson of Arizona State University, who provided the overall vision 
for the book and oversaw the development of each and every chapter, drawing up the initial blueprint, reading 
numerous drafts, and assimilating field reviews into actionable revision plans for our authors and editors. 
The collective experience of our author team allowed us to pinpoint the subtopics, exceptions, and individual 
connections that give students the most trouble. The textbook is therefore replete with well-designed features and 
highlights which help students overcome these barriers. As the students read and practice, they are coached in methods 
of thinking through problems and internalizing mathematical processes. 

Accuracy of the Content 
We understand that precision and accuracy are imperatives in mathematics, and undertook a dedicated accuracy 
program led by experienced faculty.Examples, art, problems, and solutions were reviewed by dedicated faculty, with a 
separate team evaluating the answer key and solutions. 
The text also benefits from years of usage by thousands of faculty and students. A core aspect of the second edition 
revision process included consolidating and ensuring consistency with regard to any errata and corrections that have 
been during in the series’ extensive usage and incorporation into homework systems. 

Changes to the Second Edition 
The Algebra and Trigonometry 2e revision focused on mathematical clarity and accuracy as well as inclusivity. Examples, 
Exercises, and Solutions were reviewed by multiple faculty experts. All improvement suggestions and errata updates, 
driven by faculty and students from several thousand colleges, were considered and unified across the different formats 
of the text. 
OpenStax and our authors are aware of the difficulties posed by shifting problem and exercise numbers when textbooks 
are revised. In an effort to make the transition to the 2nd edition as seamless as possible, we have minimized any 
shifting of exercise numbers. 
The revision also focused on supporting inclusive and welcoming learning experiences. The introductory narratives, 
example and problem contexts, and even many of the names used for fictional people in the text were all reviewed using 
a diversity, equity, and inclusion framework. Several hundred resulting revisions improve the balance and relevance to 
the students using the text, while maintaining a variety of applications to diverse careers and academic fields. In 
particular, explanations of scientific and historical aspects of mathematics have been expanded to include more 
contributors. For example, the authors added additional historical and multicultural context regarding what is widely 
known as Pascal’s Triangle, and similarly added details regarding the international process of decoding the Enigma 
machine (including the role of Polish college students). Several chapter opening narratives and in-chapter references are 
completely new, and contexts across all chapters were specifically reviewed for equity in gender representation and 
connotation. 
Finally, prior to the release of this edition, OpenStax published a series of Corequisite Skillsheets to support different 
models and approaches to instruction. These remain available, and are described in more detail below. 

Access for free at openstax.org



Preface     3

Pedagogical Foundations and Features 
Learning Objectives 
Each chapter is divided into multiple sections (or modules), each of which is organized around a set of learning 
objectives. The learning objectives are listed explicitly at the beginning of each section and are the focal point of every 
instructional element 

Narrative text 
Narrative text is used to introduce key concepts, terms, and definitions, to provide real-world context, and to provide 
transitions between topics and examples. Throughout this book, we rely on a few basic conventions to highlight the 
most important ideas: 

• Key terms are boldfaced, typically when first introduced and/or when formally defined. 
• Key concepts and definitions are called out in a blue box for easy reference. 

Examples 
Each learning objective is supported by one or more worked examples, that demonstrate the problem-solving 
approaches that students must master. The multiple Examples model different approaches to the same type of problem, 
or introduce similar problems of increasing complexity. 
All Examples follow a simple two- or three-part format. The question clearly lays out a mathematical problem to solve. 
The Solution walks through the steps, usually providing context for the approach—in other words, why the instructor is 
solving the problem in a specific manner. Finally, the Analysis (for select Examples) reflects on the broader implications of 
the Solution just shown. Examples are followed by a Try It question, as explained below. 

Figures 
Algebra and Trigonometry 2e contains more than 2000 figures and illustrations, the vast majority of which are graphs 
and diagrams. Art throughout the text adheres to a clear, understated style, drawing the eye to the most important 
information in each figure while minimizing visual distractions. Color contrast is employed with discretion to distinguish 
between the different functions or features of a graph. 

Supporting Features 
Several elements contribute to and check understanding. 

A “How To” is a list of steps necessary to solve a certain type of problem. A How To typically precedes an Example 
that proceeds to demonstrate the steps in action. 
A “Try It” exercise immediately follows an Example or a set of related Examples, providing the student with an 
immediate opportunity to solve a similar problem. In the PDF and the Web View version of the text, answers to the 
Try It exercises are located in the Answer Key. 
A Q&A may appear at any point in the narrative, but most often follows an Example. This feature pre-empts 
misconceptions by posing a commonly asked yes/no question, followed by a detailed answer and explanation. 
The “Media” icon appears at the conclusion of each section, just prior to the Section Exercises. This icon marks a list 



4     Preface

of links to online video tutorials that reinforce the concepts and skills introduced in the section. 
While we have selected tutorials that closely align to our learning objectives, we did not produce these tutorials, nor 
were they specifically produced or tailored to accompany Algebra and Trigonometry 2e. 

Section Exercises 
Each section of every chapter concludes with a well-rounded set of exercises that can be assigned as homework or used 
selectively for guided practice. With over 6300 exercises across the 13 chapters, instructors should have plenty from 
which to choose. 
Section Exercises are organized by question type, and generally appear in the following order: 

Verbal questions assess conceptual understanding of key terms and concepts. 
Algebraic problems require students to apply algebraic manipulations demonstrated in the section. 
Graphical problems assess students’ ability to interpret or produce a graph. 
Numeric problems require the student to perform calculations or computations. 
Technology problems encourage exploration through use of a graphing utility, either to visualize or verify algebraic 
results or to solve problems via an alternative to the methods demonstrated in the section. 
Extensions pose problems more challenging than the Examples demonstrated in the section. They require students 
to synthesize multiple learning objectives or apply critical thinking to solve complex problems. 
Real-World Applications present realistic problem scenarios from fields such as physics, geology, biology, finance, 
and the social sciences. 

Chapter Review Features 
Each chapter concludes with a review of the most important takeaways, as well as additional practice problems that 
students can use to prepare for exams. 

Key Terms provides a formal definition for each bold-faced term in the chapter. 
Key Equations presents a compilation of formulas, theorems, and standard-form equations. 
Key Concepts summarizes the most important ideas introduced in each section, linking back to the relevant 
Example(s) in case students need to review. 
Chapter Review Exercises include 40-80 practice problems that recall the most important concepts from each 
section. 
Practice Test includes 25-50 problems assessing the most important learning objectives from the chapter. Note that 
the practice test is not organized by section, and may be more heavily weighted toward cumulative objectives as 
opposed to the foundational objectives covered in the opening sections. 

Corequisite Support 
Each Algebra and Trigonometry 2e section is paired with a thoughtfully developed, topically aligned skills module that 
prepares students for the course material. Sharon North (St. Louis Community College) developed a coordinated set of 
support resources, which provide review, instruction, and practice for algebra students. The author team identified 
foundational skills and concepts, then mapped them to each module. The corequisite sections include conceptual 
overviews, worked examples, and guided practice; they incorporate relevant material from OpenStax’s Developmental 
Math series. They are available as separate, openly accessible downloads from the student and instructor resources 
pages accompanying the text. 

Answers to Questions in the Book 
Students are provided with answers to Examples directly below the question. The answer key in the book contains all 
answers to Try It questions as well as answers to odd-numbered Section Exercises, Review Exercises, and Practice Tests. 
In order to allow instructors as much flexibility as possible, even-numbered answers to Section Exercises, Review 
Exercises, and Practice Tests are provided only to instructors via the Instructor Answer Guide on the Instructor Resources 
page. 

Additional Resources 
Student and Instructor Resources 
We’ve compiled additional resources for both students and instructors, including Getting Started Guides, instructor 
solution manual, Corequisite skillsheets, and PowerPoint slides. Instructor resources require a verified instructor 
account, which can be requested on your openstax.org log-in. Take advantage of these resources to supplement your 
OpenStax book. 

Community Hubs 
OpenStax partners with the Institute for the Study of Knowledge Management in Education (ISKME) to offer Community 
Hubs on OER Commons—a platform for instructors to share community-created resources that support OpenStax 

Access for free at openstax.org



Preface     5

books, free of charge. Through our Community Hubs, instructors can upload their own materials or download resources 
to use in their own courses, including additional ancillaries, teaching material, multimedia, and relevant course content. 
We encourage instructors to join the hubs for the subjects most relevant to your teaching and research as an 
opportunity both to enrich your courses and to engage with other faculty. To reach the Community Hubs, visit 
www.oercommons.org/hubs/openstax. 

Technology partners 
As allies in making high-quality learning materials accessible, our technology partners offer optional low-cost tools that 
are integrated with OpenStax books. To access the technology options for your text, visit your book page on 
openstax.org. 

About the Authors 
Senior Contributing Author 
Jay Abramson, Arizona State University 
Jay Abramson has been teaching Precalculus for over 35 years, the last 20 at Arizona State University, where he is a 
principal lecturer in the School of Mathematics and Statistics. His accomplishments at ASU include co-developing the 
university’s first hybrid and online math courses as well as an extensive library of video lectures and tutorials. In 
addition, he has served as a contributing author for two of Pearson Education’s math programs, NovaNet Precalculus 
and Trigonometry. Prior to coming to ASU, Jay taught at Texas State Technical College and Amarillo College. He received 
Teacher of the Year awards at both institutions. 

Contributing Authors 
Valeree Falduto, Palm Beach State College 
Rachael Gross, Towson University 
David Lippman, Pierce College 
Melonie Rasmussen, Pierce College 
Rick Norwood, East Tennessee State University 
Nicholas Belloit, Florida State College Jacksonville 
Jean-Marie Magnier, Springfield Technical Community College 
Harold Whipple 
Christina Fernandez 

Reviewers 
Phil Clark, Scottsdale Community College 
Michael Cohen, Hofstra University 
Charles Conrad, Volunteer State Community College 
David French, Tidewater Community College 
Matthew Goodell, SUNY Ulster 
Lance Hemlow, Raritan Valley Community College 
Dongrin Kim, Arizona State University 
Cynthia Landrigan, Eerie Community College 
Wendy Lightheart, Lane Community College 
Chinenye Ofodile, Albany State University 
Carl Penziul, Tompkins-Cortland Community College 
Sandra Nite, Texas A&M University 
Eugenia Peterson, Richard J. Daley College 
Rhonda Porter, Albany State University 
Michael Price, University of Oregon 
Steven Purtee, Valencia College 
William Radulovich, Florida State College Jacksonville 
Camelia Salajean, City Colleges of Chicago 
Katy Shields, Oakland Community College 
Nathan Schrenk, ECPI University 
Pablo Suarez, Delaware State University 
Allen Wolmer, Atlanta Jewish Academy 
The following faculty contributed to the development of OpenStax Precalculus, the text from which this product was 
updated and derived. 
Precalculus Reviewers 
Nina Alketa, Cecil College 



6     Preface

Kiran Bhutani, Catholic University of America 
Brandie Biddy, Cecil College 
Lisa Blank, Lyme Central School 
Bryan Blount, Kentucky Wesleyan College 
Jessica Bolz, The Bryn Mawr School 
Sheri Boyd, Rollins College 
Sarah Brewer, Alabama School of Math and Science 
Charles Buckley, St. Gregory’s University 
Michael Cohen, Hofstra University 
Kenneth Crane, Texarkana College 
Rachel Cywinski, Alamo Colleges 
Nathan Czuba 
Srabasti Dutta, Ashford University 
Kristyanna Erickson, Notre Dame of Maryland University 
Nicole Fernandez, Georgetown University / Kent State University 
David French, Tidewater Community College 
Douglas Furman, SUNY Ulster 
Lance Hemlow, Raritan Valley Community College 
Erinn Izzo, Nicaragua Christian Academy 
John Jaffe 
Jerry Jared, Blue Ridge School 
Stan Kopec, Mount Wachusett Community College 
Kathy Kovacs 
Cynthia Landrigan, Erie Community College 
Sara Lenhart, Christopher Newport University 
Wendy Lightheart, Lane Community College 
Joanne Manville, Bunker Hill Community College 
Karla McCavit, Albion College 
Cynthia McGinnis, Northwest Florida State College 
Lana Neal, University of Texas at Austin 
Rhonda Porter, Albany State University 
Steven Purtee, Valencia College 
William Radulovich, Florida State College Jacksonville 
Alice Ramos, Bethel College 
Nick Reynolds, Montgomery Community College 
Amanda Ross, A. A. Ross Consulting and Research, LLC 
Erica Rutter, Arizona State University 
Sutandra Sarkar, Georgia State University 
Willy Schild, Wentworth Institute of Technology 
Todd Stephen, Cleveland State University 
Scott Sykes, University of West Georgia 
Linda Tansil, Southeast Missouri State University 
John Thomas, College of Lake County 
Diane Valade, Piedmont Virginia Community College 
Allen Wolmer, Atlanta Jewish Academy 

Access for free at openstax.org



1 • Introduction to Prerequisites          7

1 PREREQUISITES 

Credit: Andreas Kambanls 

Chapter Outline 
1.1 Real Numbers: Algebra Essentials 
1.2 Exponents and Scientific Notation 
1.3 Radicals and Rational Exponents 
1.4 Polynomials 
1.5 Factoring Polynomials 
1.6 Rational Expressions 

Introduction to Prerequisites 
It’s a cold day in Antarctica. In fact, it’s always a cold day in Antarctica. Earth’s southernmost continent, Antarctica 
experiences the coldest, driest, and windiest conditions known. The coldest temperature ever recorded, over one 
hundred degrees below zero on the Celsius scale, was recorded by remote satellite. It is no surprise then, that no native 
human population can survive the harsh conditions. Only explorers and scientists brave the environment for any length 
of time. 
Measuring and recording the characteristics of weather conditions in Antarctica requires a use of different kinds of 
numbers. For tens of thousands of years, humans have undertaken methods to tally, track, and record numerical 
information. While we don’t know much about their usage, the Lebombo Bone (dated to about 35,000 BCE) and the 
Ishango Bone (dated to about 20,000 BCE) are among the earliest mathematical artifacts. Found in Africa, their clearly 
deliberate groupings of notches may have been used to track time, moon cycles, or other information. Performing 
calculations with them and using the results to make predictions requires an understanding of relationships among 
numbers. In this chapter, we will review sets of numbers and properties of operations used to manipulate numbers. This 
understanding will serve as prerequisite knowledge throughout our study of algebra and trigonometry. 

1.1 Real Numbers: Algebra Essentials 
Learning Objectives 
In this section, you will: 

Classify a real number as a natural, whole, integer, rational, or irrational number. 
Perform calculations using order of operations. 
Use the following properties of real numbers: commutative, associative, distributive, inverse, and identity. 
Evaluate algebraic expressions. 
Simplify algebraic expressions. 

It is often said that mathematics is the language of science. If this is true, then an essential part of the language of 



8     1 • Prerequisites

mathematics is numbers. The earliest use of numbers occurred 100 centuries ago in the Middle East to count, or 
enumerate items. Farmers, cattle herders, and traders used tokens, stones, or markers to signify a single quantity—a 
sheaf of grain, a head of livestock, or a fixed length of cloth, for example. Doing so made commerce possible, leading to 
improved communications and the spread of civilization. 
Three to four thousand years ago, Egyptians introduced fractions. They first used them to show reciprocals. Later, they 
used them to represent the amount when a quantity was divided into equal parts. 
But what if there were no cattle to trade or an entire crop of grain was lost in a flood? How could someone indicate the 
existence of nothing? From earliest times, people had thought of a “base state” while counting and used various symbols 
to represent this null condition. However, it was not until about the fifth century CE in India that zero was added to the 
number system and used as a numeral in calculations. 
Clearly, there was also a need for numbers to represent loss or debt. In India, in the seventh century CE, negative 
numbers were used as solutions to mathematical equations and commercial debts. The opposites of the counting 
numbers expanded the number system even further. 
Because of the evolution of the number system, we can now perform complex calculations using these and other 
categories of real numbers. In this section, we will explore sets of numbers, calculations with different kinds of numbers, 
and the use of numbers in expressions. 

Classifying a Real Number 
The numbers we use for counting, or enumerating items, are the natural numbers: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and so on. We describe 
them in set notation as  where the ellipsis (…) indicates that the numbers continue to infinity. The natural 
numbers are, of course, also called the counting numbers. Any time we enumerate the members of a team, count the 
coins in a collection, or tally the trees in a grove, we are using the set of natural numbers. The set of whole numbers is 
the set of natural numbers plus zero: 
The set of integers adds the opposites of the natural numbers to the set of whole numbers: 

 It is useful to note that the set of integers is made up of three distinct subsets: negative 
integers, zero, and positive integers. In this sense, the positive integers are just the natural numbers. Another way to 
think about it is that the natural numbers are a subset of the integers. 

The set of rational numbers is written as  Notice from the definition that rational 
numbers are fractions (or quotients) containing integers in both the numerator and the denominator, and the 
denominator is never 0. We can also see that every natural number, whole number, and integer is a rational number with 
a denominator of 1. 
Because they are fractions, any rational number can also be expressed as a terminating or repeating decimal. Any 
rational number can be represented as either: 

ⓐ a terminating decimal:  or  ⓑ a repeating decimal: 
We use a line drawn over the repeating block of numbers instead of writing the group multiple times. 

EXAMPLE 1 

Writing Integers as Rational Numbers 
Write each of the following as a rational number. 

ⓐ 7  ⓑ 0  ⓒ –8 
Solution 

Write a fraction with the integer in the numerator and 1 in the denominator. 

ⓐ   ⓑ   ⓒ  

 TRY IT #1 Write each of the following as a rational number. 

ⓐ 11  ⓑ 3  ⓒ –4 

Access for free at openstax.org



1.1 • Real Numbers: Algebra Essentials     9

EXAMPLE 2 

Identifying Rational Numbers 
Write each of the following rational numbers as either a terminating or repeating decimal. 

ⓐ   ⓑ   ⓒ  
Solution 

Write each fraction as a decimal by dividing the numerator by the denominator. 

ⓐ   a repeating decimal  ⓑ   (or 3.0), a terminating decimal 
ⓒ   a terminating decimal 

 TRY IT #2 Write each of the following rational numbers as either a terminating or repeating decimal. 

ⓐ   ⓑ   ⓒ  

Irrational Numbers 
At some point in the ancient past, someone discovered that not all numbers are rational numbers. A builder, for instance, 
may have found that the diagonal of a square with unit sides was not 2 or even  but was something else. Or a garment 
maker might have observed that the ratio of the circumference to the diameter of a roll of cloth was a little bit more than 
3, but still not a rational number. Such numbers are said to be irrational because they cannot be written as fractions. 
These numbers make up the set of irrational numbers. Irrational numbers cannot be expressed as a fraction of two 
integers. It is impossible to describe this set of numbers by a single rule except to say that a number is irrational if it is 
not rational. So we write this as shown. 

EXAMPLE 3 

Differentiating Rational and Irrational Numbers 
Determine whether each of the following numbers is rational or irrational. If it is rational, determine whether it is a 
terminating or repeating decimal. 

ⓐ   ⓑ   ⓒ   ⓓ   ⓔ  
Solution 

ⓐ   This can be simplified as  Therefore,  is rational. 
ⓑ   Because it is a fraction of integers,  is a rational number. Next, simplify and divide. 

So,  is rational and a repeating decimal. 

ⓒ   is irrational because 11 is not a perfect square and  cannot be expressed as a fraction. 
ⓓ   Because it is a fraction of integers,  is a rational number. Simplify and divide. 

So,  is rational and a terminating decimal. 

ⓔ   is not a terminating decimal. Also note that there is no repeating pattern because the group 
of 3s increases each time. Therefore it is neither a terminating nor a repeating decimal and, hence, not a rational 
number. It is an irrational number. 

 TRY IT #3 Determine whether each of the following numbers is rational or irrational. If it is rational, 



10     1 • Prerequisites

determine whether it is a terminating or repeating decimal. 

ⓐ   ⓑ   ⓒ   ⓓ   ⓔ  

Real Numbers 
Given any number n, we know that n is either rational or irrational. It cannot be both. The sets of rational and irrational 
numbers together make up the set of real numbers. As we saw with integers, the real numbers can be divided into 
three subsets: negative real numbers, zero, and positive real numbers. Negative and positive real numbers include 
fractions, decimals, and irrational numbers according to their algebraic sign (+ or –). Zero is considered neither positive 
nor negative. 
The real numbers can be visualized on a horizontal number line with an arbitrary point chosen as 0, with negative 
numbers to the left of 0 and positive numbers to the right of 0. A fixed unit distance is then used to mark off each 
integer (or other basic value) on either side of 0. Any real number corresponds to a unique position on the number 
line.The converse is also true: Each location on the number line corresponds to exactly one real number. This is known as 
a one-to-one correspondence. We refer to this as the real number line as shown in Figure 1. 

Figure 1 The real number line 

EXAMPLE 4 

Classifying Real Numbers 
Classify each number as either positive or negative and as either rational or irrational. Does the number lie to the left or 
the right of 0 on the number line? 

ⓐ   ⓑ   ⓒ   ⓓ   ⓔ  
Solution 

ⓐ   is negative and rational. It lies to the left of 0 on the number line. 

ⓑ   is positive and irrational. It lies to the right of 0. 

ⓒ   is negative and rational. It lies to the left of 0. 
ⓓ   is negative and irrational. It lies to the left of 0. 
ⓔ   is a repeating decimal so it is rational and positive. It lies to the right of 0. 

 TRY IT #4 Classify each number as either positive or negative and as either rational or irrational. Does the 
number lie to the left or the right of 0 on the number line? 

ⓐ   ⓑ   ⓒ   ⓓ   ⓔ  

Sets of Numbers as Subsets 
Beginning with the natural numbers, we have expanded each set to form a larger set, meaning that there is a subset 
relationship between the sets of numbers we have encountered so far. These relationships become more obvious when 
seen as a diagram, such as Figure 2. 

Access for free at openstax.org



1.1 • Real Numbers: Algebra Essentials     11

Figure 2 Sets of numbers 
N: the set of natural numbers 
W: the set of whole numbers 
I: the set of integers 
Q: the set of rational numbers 
Q´: the set of irrational numbers 

Sets of Numbers 

The set of natural numbers includes the numbers used for counting: 

The set of whole numbers is the set of natural numbers plus zero: 

The set of integers adds the negative natural numbers to the set of whole numbers: 

The set of rational numbers includes fractions written as 

The set of irrational numbers is the set of numbers that are not rational, are nonrepeating, and are nonterminating: 

EXAMPLE 5 

Differentiating the Sets of Numbers 
Classify each number as being a natural number (N), whole number (W), integer (I), rational number (Q), and/or irrational 
number (Q′). 

ⓐ   ⓑ   ⓒ   ⓓ   ⓔ  
Solution 

N W I Q Q′ 

a. X X X X 

b. X 

c. X 

d. –6 X X 

e. 3.2121121112... X 



12     1 • Prerequisites

 TRY IT #5 Classify each number as being a natural number (N), whole number (W), integer (I), rational 
number (Q), and/or irrational number (Q′). 

ⓐ   ⓑ   ⓒ   ⓓ   ⓔ  

Performing Calculations Using the Order of Operations 
When we multiply a number by itself, we square it or raise it to a power of 2. For example,  We can raise 
any number to any power. In general, the exponential notation  means that the number or variable  is used as a 
factor  times. 

In this notation,  is read as the nth power of or  to the  where  is called the base and  is called the exponent. A 
term in exponential notation may be part of a mathematical expression, which is a combination of numbers and 
operators, i.e., + addition, – subtraction, × multiplication, ÷ division. For example,  is a mathematical 
expression. 
To evaluate a mathematical expression, we perform the various operations. However, we do not perform them in any 
random order. We use the order of operations. This is a sequence of rules for evaluating such expressions. 
Recall that in mathematics we use parentheses ( ), brackets [ ], and braces { } to group numbers and expressions so that 
anything appearing within the symbols is treated as a unit. Additionally, fraction bars, radicals, and absolute value bars 
are treated as grouping symbols. When evaluating a mathematical expression, begin by simplifying expressions within 
grouping symbols. 
The next step is to address any exponents or radicals. Afterward, perform multiplication and division from left to right 
and finally addition and subtraction from left to right. 
Let’s take a look at the expression provided. 

There are no grouping symbols, so we move on to exponents or radicals. The number 4 is raised to a power of 2, so 
simplify  as 16. 

Next, perform multiplication or division, left to right. 

Lastly, perform addition or subtraction, left to right. 

Therefore, 

For some complicated expressions, several passes through the order of operations will be needed. For instance, there 
may be a radical expression inside parentheses that must be simplified before the parentheses are evaluated. Following 
the order of operations ensures that anyone simplifying the same mathematical expression will get the same result. 

Access for free at openstax.org



1.1 • Real Numbers: Algebra Essentials     13

Order of Operations 

Operations in mathematical expressions must be evaluated in a systematic order, which can be simplified using the 
acronym PEMDAS: 

P(arentheses) 
E(xponents) 
M(ultiplication) and D(ivision) 
A(ddition) and S(ubtraction) 

...
HOW TO 

Given a mathematical expression, simplify it using the order of operations. 

Step 1. Simplify any expressions within grouping symbols. 
Step 2. Simplify any expressions containing exponents or radicals. 
Step 3. Perform any multiplication and division in order, from left to right. 
Step 4. Perform any addition and subtraction in order, from left to right. 

EXAMPLE 6 

Using the Order of Operations 
Use the order of operations to evaluate each of the following expressions. 

ⓐ   ⓑ   ⓒ   ⓓ  

ⓔ  
Solution 

ⓐ 

ⓑ 

Note that in the first step, the radical is treated as a grouping symbol, like parentheses. Also, in the third step, the 
fraction bar is considered a grouping symbol so the numerator is considered to be grouped. 

ⓒ 



14     1 • Prerequisites

ⓓ 

In this example, the fraction bar separates the numerator and denominator, which we simplify separately until the last 
step. 

ⓔ 

 TRY IT #6 Use the order of operations to evaluate each of the following expressions. 

ⓐ   ⓑ   ⓒ  

ⓓ   ⓔ  

Using Properties of Real Numbers 
For some activities we perform, the order of certain operations does not matter, but the order of other operations does. 
For example, it does not make a difference if we put on the right shoe before the left or vice-versa. However, it does 
matter whether we put on shoes or socks first. The same thing is true for operations in mathematics. 

Commutative Properties 
The commutative property of addition states that numbers may be added in any order without affecting the sum. 

We can better see this relationship when using real numbers. 

Similarly, the commutative property of multiplication states that numbers may be multiplied in any order without 
affecting the product. 

Again, consider an example with real numbers. 

It is important to note that neither subtraction nor division is commutative. For example,  is not the same as 
 Similarly, 

Associative Properties 
The associative property of multiplication tells us that it does not matter how we group numbers when multiplying. 
We can move the grouping symbols to make the calculation easier, and the product remains the same. 

Consider this example. 

The associative property of addition tells us that numbers may be grouped differently without affecting the sum. 

This property can be especially helpful when dealing with negative integers. Consider this example. 

Access for free at openstax.org



1.1 • Real Numbers: Algebra Essentials     15

Are subtraction and division associative? Review these examples. 

As we can see, neither subtraction nor division is associative. 

Distributive Property 
The distributive property states that the product of a factor times a sum is the sum of the factor times each term in the 
sum. 

This property combines both addition and multiplication (and is the only property to do so). Let us consider an example. 

Note that 4 is outside the grouping symbols, so we distribute the 4 by multiplying it by 12, multiplying it by –7, and 
adding the products. 
To be more precise when describing this property, we say that multiplication distributes over addition. The reverse is not 
true, as we can see in this example. 

A special case of the distributive property occurs when a sum of terms is subtracted. 

For example, consider the difference  We can rewrite the difference of the two terms 12 and  by 
turning the subtraction expression into addition of the opposite. So instead of subtracting  we add the opposite. 

Now, distribute  and simplify the result. 

This seems like a lot of trouble for a simple sum, but it illustrates a powerful result that will be useful once we introduce 
algebraic terms. To subtract a sum of terms, change the sign of each term and add the results. With this in mind, we can 
rewrite the last example. 

Identity Properties 
The identity property of addition states that there is a unique number, called the additive identity (0) that, when added 
to a number, results in the original number. 

The identity property of multiplication states that there is a unique number, called the multiplicative identity (1) that, 
when multiplied by a number, results in the original number. 

For example, we have  and  There are no exceptions for these properties; they work for every 
real number, including 0 and 1. 



16     1 • Prerequisites

Inverse Properties 
The inverse property of addition states that, for every real number a, there is a unique number, called the additive 
inverse (or opposite), denoted by (−a), that, when added to the original number, results in the additive identity, 0. 

For example, if  the additive inverse is 8, since 
The inverse property of multiplication holds for all real numbers except 0 because the reciprocal of 0 is not defined. 
The property states that, for every real number a, there is a unique number, called the multiplicative inverse (or 
reciprocal), denoted  that, when multiplied by the original number, results in the multiplicative identity, 1. 

For example, if  the reciprocal, denoted  is  because 

Properties of Real Numbers 

The following properties hold for real numbers a, b, and c. 

Addition Multiplication 

Commutative 
Property 

Associative 
Property 

Distributive 
Property 

Identity There exists a unique real number called the There exists a unique real number called the 
Property additive identity, 0, such that, for any real multiplicative identity, 1, such that, for any real 

number a number a 

Inverse Every real number a has an additive inverse, Every nonzero real number a has a 
Property or opposite, denoted –a, such that multiplicative inverse, or reciprocal, denoted 

such that 

EXAMPLE 7 

Using Properties of Real Numbers 
Use the properties of real numbers to rewrite and simplify each expression. State which properties apply. 

ⓐ   ⓑ   ⓒ   ⓓ   ⓔ  

Access for free at openstax.org



1.1 • Real Numbers: Algebra Essentials     17

Solution 
ⓐ 

ⓑ 

ⓒ 

ⓓ 

ⓔ 

 TRY IT #7 Use the properties of real numbers to rewrite and simplify each expression. State which properties 
apply. 

ⓐ   ⓑ   ⓒ  
ⓓ   ⓔ  

Evaluating Algebraic Expressions 
So far, the mathematical expressions we have seen have involved real numbers only. In mathematics, we may see 
expressions such as  or  In the expression  5 is called a constant because it does not vary 
and x is called a variable because it does. (In naming the variable, ignore any exponents or radicals containing the 
variable.) An algebraic expression is a collection of constants and variables joined together by the algebraic operations 
of addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division. 
We have already seen some real number examples of exponential notation, a shorthand method of writing products of 
the same factor. When variables are used, the constants and variables are treated the same way. 

In each case, the exponent tells us how many factors of the base to use, whether the base consists of constants or 
variables. 
Any variable in an algebraic expression may take on or be assigned different values. When that happens, the value of the 
algebraic expression changes. To evaluate an algebraic expression means to determine the value of the expression for a 
given value of each variable in the expression. Replace each variable in the expression with the given value, then simplify 
the resulting expression using the order of operations. If the algebraic expression contains more than one variable, 
replace each variable with its assigned value and simplify the expression as before. 



18     1 • Prerequisites

EXAMPLE 8 

Describing Algebraic Expressions 
List the constants and variables for each algebraic expression. 

ⓐ  x + 5  ⓑ   ⓒ  
Solution 

Constants Variables 

a. x + 5 5 x 

b. 

c. 2 

 TRY IT #8 List the constants and variables for each algebraic expression. 

ⓐ   ⓑ 2(L + W)  ⓒ  

EXAMPLE 9 

Evaluating an Algebraic Expression at Different Values 
Evaluate the expression  for each value for x. 

ⓐ   ⓑ   ⓒ   ⓓ  
Solution 

ⓐ  Substitute 0 for  ⓑ Substitute 1 for  ⓒ  Substitute  for  ⓓ Substitute  for 

 TRY IT #9 Evaluate the expression  for each value for y. 

ⓐ   ⓑ   ⓒ   ⓓ  

EXAMPLE 10 

Evaluating Algebraic Expressions 
Evaluate each expression for the given values. 

ⓐ   for  ⓑ   for  ⓒ   for  ⓓ   for 

ⓔ   for 
Solution 

ⓐ  Substitute  for  ⓑ  Substitute 10 for  ⓒ  Substitute 5 for 

Access for free at openstax.org



1.1 • Real Numbers: Algebra Essentials     19

ⓓ  Substitute 11 for  and –8 for  ⓔ  Substitute 2 for  and 3 for 

 TRY IT #10 Evaluate each expression for the given values. 

ⓐ   for  ⓑ   for  ⓒ   for 

ⓓ   for  ⓔ   for 

Formulas 
An equation is a mathematical statement indicating that two expressions are equal. The expressions can be numerical 
or algebraic. The equation is not inherently true or false, but only a proposition. The values that make the equation true, 
the solutions, are found using the properties of real numbers and other results. For example, the equation 
has the solution of 3  because when we substitute 3 for  in the equation, we obtain the true statement 
A formula is an equation expressing a relationship between constant and variable quantities. Very often, the equation is 
a means of finding the value of one quantity (often a single variable) in terms of another or other quantities. One of the 
most common examples is the formula for finding the area  of a circle in terms of the radius  of the circle: 
For any value of  the area  can be found by evaluating the expression 

EXAMPLE 11 

Using a Formula 
A right circular cylinder with radius  and height  has the surface area  (in square units) given by the formula 

 See Figure 3. Find the surface area of a cylinder with radius 6 in. and height 9 in. Leave the answer in 
terms of 

Figure 3 Right circular cylinder 

Solution 
Evaluate the expression  for  and 

The surface area is  square inches. 

 TRY IT #11 A photograph with length L and width W is placed in a mat of width 8 centimeters (cm). The area 
of the mat (in square centimeters, or cm2) is found to be  See 
Figure 4. Find the area of a mat for a photograph with length 32 cm and width 24 cm. 



20     1 • Prerequisites

Figure 4 

Simplifying Algebraic Expressions 
Sometimes we can simplify an algebraic expression to make it easier to evaluate or to use in some other way. To do so, 
we use the properties of real numbers. We can use the same properties in formulas because they contain algebraic 
expressions. 

EXAMPLE 12 

Simplifying Algebraic Expressions 
Simplify each algebraic expression. 

ⓐ   ⓑ   ⓒ   ⓓ  
Solution 

ⓐ 

ⓑ 

ⓒ 

ⓓ 

 TRY IT #12 Simplify each algebraic expression. 

ⓐ   ⓑ   ⓒ  
ⓓ  

EXAMPLE 13 

Simplifying a Formula 
A rectangle with length  and width  has a perimeter  given by  Simplify this expression. 

Access for free at openstax.org



1.1 • Real Numbers: Algebra Essentials     21

Solution 

 TRY IT #13 If the amount  is deposited into an account paying simple interest  for time  the total value of 
the deposit  is given by  Simplify the expression. (This formula will be explored in 
more detail later in the course.) 

 MEDIA 

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with real numbers. 

Simplify an Expression. (https://openstax.org/l/simexpress) 
Evaluate an Expression 1. (https://openstax.org/l/ordofoper1) 
Evaluate an Expression 2. (https://openstax.org/l/ordofoper2) 

 1.1 SECTION EXERCISES 
Verbal 

1 . Is  an example of a  2 . What is the order of  3 . What do the Associative 
rational terminating, operations? What acronym Properties allow us to do 
rational repeating, or is used to describe the order when following the order of 
irrational number? Tell why of operations, and what operations? Explain your 
it fits that category. does it stand for? answer. 

Numeric 

For the following exercises, simplify the given expression. 

4 .  5 .  6 . 

7 .  8 .  9 . 

10 .  11 .  12 . 
13 .  14 .  15 . 

16 .  17 .  18 . 

19 .  20 .  21 . 

22 .  23 .  24 . 

25 .  26 .  27 . 

Algebraic 

For the following exercises, evaluate the expression using the given value of the variable. 
28 .  for  29 .  for  30 .  for 

31 .  for  32 .  for  33 .  for 



22     1 • Prerequisites

34 .  for  35 .  for  36 .  for 

37 .  for 

For the following exercises, simplify the expression. 

38 .  39 .  40 . 

41 .  42 .  43 . 

44 .  45 .  46 . 

47 .  48 .  49 . 

50 .  51 .  52 . 

Real-World Applications 

For the following exercises, consider this scenario: Fred earns $40 at the community garden. He spends $10 on a 
streaming subscription, puts half of what is left in a savings account, and gets another $5 for walking his neighbor’s dog. 
53 . Write the expression that represents the number  54 . How much money does Fred keep? 

of dollars Fred keeps (and does not put in his 
savings account). Remember the order of 
operations. 

For the following exercises, solve the given problem. 
55 . According to the U.S. Mint, the diameter of a  56 . Jessica and her roommate, Adriana, have decided 

quarter is 0.955 inches. The circumference of the to share a change jar for joint expenses. Jessica 
quarter would be the diameter multiplied by  Is put her loose change in the jar first, and then 
the circumference of a quarter a whole number, a Adriana put her change in the jar. We know that it 
rational number, or an irrational number? does not matter in which order the change was 

added to the jar. What property of addition 
describes this fact? 

For the following exercises, consider this scenario: There is a mound of  pounds of gravel in a quarry. Throughout the 
day, 400 pounds of gravel is added to the mound. Two orders of 600 pounds are sold and the gravel is removed from the 
mound. At the end of the day, the mound has 1,200 pounds of gravel. 
57 . Write the equation that describes the situation.  58 . Solve for g. 

For the following exercise, solve the given problem. 
59 . Ramon runs the marketing department at their 

company. Their department gets a budget every 
year, and every year, they must spend the entire 
budget without going over. If they spend less than 
the budget, then the department gets a smaller 
budget the following year. At the beginning of this 
year, Ramon got $2.5 million for the annual 
marketing budget. They must spend the budget 
such that  What property of 
addition tells us what the value of x must be? 

Technology 

For the following exercises, use a graphing calculator to solve for x. Round the answers to the nearest hundredth. 

60 .  61 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



1.2 • Exponents and Scientific Notation     23

Extensions 

62 . If a whole number is not a  63 . Determine whether the  64 . Determine whether the 
natural number, what must statement is true or false: statement is true or false: 
the number be? The multiplicative inverse The product of a rational 

of a rational number is also and irrational number is 
rational. always irrational. 

65 . Determine whether the  66 . Determine whether the  67 . The division of two natural 
simplified expression is simplified expression is numbers will always result 
rational or irrational: rational or irrational: in what type of number? 

68 . What property of real 
numbers would simplify 
the following expression: 

1.2 Exponents and Scientific Notation 
Learning Objectives 
In this section, you will: 

Use the product rule of exponents. 
Use the quotient rule of exponents. 
Use the power rule of exponents. 
Use the zero exponent rule of exponents. 
Use the negative rule of exponents. 
Find the power of a product and a quotient. 
Simplify exponential expressions. 
Use scientific notation. 

Mathematicians, scientists, and economists commonly encounter very large and very small numbers. But it may not be 
obvious how common such figures are in everyday life. For instance, a pixel is the smallest unit of light that can be 
perceived and recorded by a digital camera. A particular camera might record an image that is 2,048 pixels by 1,536 
pixels, which is a very high resolution picture. It can also perceive a color depth (gradations in colors) of up to 48 bits per 
pixel, and can shoot the equivalent of 24 frames per second. The maximum possible number of bits of information used 
to film a one-hour (3,600-second) digital film is then an extremely large number. 
Using a calculator, we enter  and press ENTER. The calculator displays 1.304596316E13. 
What does this mean? The “E13” portion of the result represents the exponent 13 of ten, so there are a maximum of 
approximately  bits of data in that one-hour film. In this section, we review rules of exponents first and then 
apply them to calculations involving very large or small numbers. 

Using the Product Rule of Exponents 
Consider the product  Both terms have the same base, x, but they are raised to different exponents. Expand each 
expression, and then rewrite the resulting expression. 

The result is that 
Notice that the exponent of the product is the sum of the exponents of the terms. In other words, when multiplying 
exponential expressions with the same base, we write the result with the common base and add the exponents. This is 
the product rule of exponents. 

Now consider an example with real numbers. 



24     1 • Prerequisites

We can always check that this is true by simplifying each exponential expression. We find that  is 8,  is 16, and  is 
128. The product  equals 128, so the relationship is true. We can use the product rule of exponents to simplify 
expressions that are a product of two numbers or expressions with the same base but different exponents. 

The Product Rule of Exponents 

For any real number  and natural numbers  and  the product rule of exponents states that 

EXAMPLE 1 

Using the Product Rule 
Write each of the following products with a single base. Do not simplify further. 

ⓐ   ⓑ   ⓒ  
Solution 

Use the product rule to simplify each expression. 

ⓐ   ⓑ   ⓒ  
At first, it may appear that we cannot simplify a product of three factors. However, using the associative property of 
multiplication, begin by simplifying the first two. 

Notice we get the same result by adding the three exponents in one step. 

 TRY IT #1 Write each of the following products with a single base. Do not simplify further. 

ⓐ   ⓑ   ⓒ  

Using the Quotient Rule of Exponents 
The quotient rule of exponents allows us to simplify an expression that divides two numbers with the same base but 
different exponents. In a similar way to the product rule, we can simplify an expression such as  where 

Consider the example  Perform the division by canceling common factors. 

Notice that the exponent of the quotient is the difference between the exponents of the divisor and dividend. 

In other words, when dividing exponential expressions with the same base, we write the result with the common base 
and subtract the exponents. 

For the time being, we must be aware of the condition  Otherwise, the difference  could be zero or negative. 
Those possibilities will be explored shortly. Also, instead of qualifying variables as nonzero each time, we will simplify 

Access for free at openstax.org



1.2 • Exponents and Scientific Notation     25

matters and assume from here on that all variables represent nonzero real numbers. 

The Quotient Rule of Exponents 

For any real number  and natural numbers  and  such that  the quotient rule of exponents states that 

EXAMPLE 2 

Using the Quotient Rule 
Write each of the following products with a single base. Do not simplify further. 

ⓐ   ⓑ   ⓒ  

Solution 
Use the quotient rule to simplify each expression. 

ⓐ   ⓑ   ⓒ  

 TRY IT #2 Write each of the following products with a single base. Do not simplify further. 

ⓐ   ⓑ   ⓒ  

Using the Power Rule of Exponents 
Suppose an exponential expression is raised to some power. Can we simplify the result? Yes. To do this, we use the power 
rule of exponents. Consider the expression  The expression inside the parentheses is multiplied twice because it 
has an exponent of 2. Then the result is multiplied three times because the entire expression has an exponent of 3. 

The exponent of the answer is the product of the exponents:  In other words, when raising an 
exponential expression to a power, we write the result with the common base and the product of the exponents. 

Be careful to distinguish between uses of the product rule and the power rule. When using the product rule, different 
terms with the same bases are raised to exponents. In this case, you add the exponents. When using the power rule, a 
term in exponential notation is raised to a power. In this case, you multiply the exponents. 



26     1 • Prerequisites

The Power Rule of Exponents 

For any real number  and positive integers  and  the power rule of exponents states that 

EXAMPLE 3 

Using the Power Rule 
Write each of the following products with a single base. Do not simplify further. 

ⓐ   ⓑ   ⓒ  
Solution 

Use the power rule to simplify each expression. 

ⓐ   ⓑ   ⓒ  

 TRY IT #3 Write each of the following products with a single base. Do not simplify further. 

ⓐ   ⓑ   ⓒ  

Using the Zero Exponent Rule of Exponents 
Return to the quotient rule. We made the condition that  so that the difference  would never be zero or 
negative. What would happen if  In this case, we would use the zero exponent rule of exponents to simplify the 
expression to 1. To see how this is done, let us begin with an example. 

If we were to simplify the original expression using the quotient rule, we would have 

If we equate the two answers, the result is  This is true for any nonzero real number, or any variable representing 
a real number. 

The sole exception is the expression  This appears later in more advanced courses, but for now, we will consider the 
value to be undefined. 

The Zero Exponent Rule of Exponents 

For any nonzero real number  the zero exponent rule of exponents states that 

EXAMPLE 4 

Using the Zero Exponent Rule 
Simplify each expression using the zero exponent rule of exponents. 

ⓐ   ⓑ   ⓒ   ⓓ  

Access for free at openstax.org



1.2 • Exponents and Scientific Notation     27

Solution 
Use the zero exponent and other rules to simplify each expression. 

ⓐ 

ⓑ 

ⓒ 

ⓓ 

 TRY IT #4 Simplify each expression using the zero exponent rule of exponents. 

ⓐ   ⓑ   ⓒ   ⓓ  

Using the Negative Rule of Exponents 
Another useful result occurs if we relax the condition that  in the quotient rule even further. For example, can we 
simplify  When  —that is, where the difference  is negative—we can use the negative rule of exponents to 
simplify the expression to its reciprocal. 

Divide one exponential expression by another with a larger exponent. Use our example, 



28     1 • Prerequisites

If we were to simplify the original expression using the quotient rule, we would have 

Putting the answers together, we have  This is true for any nonzero real number, or any variable representing 
a nonzero real number. 
A factor with a negative exponent becomes the same factor with a positive exponent if it is moved across the fraction 
bar—from numerator to denominator or vice versa. 

We have shown that the exponential expression  is defined when  is a natural number, 0, or the negative of a natural 
number. That means that  is defined for any integer  Also, the product and quotient rules and all of the rules we will 
look at soon hold for any integer 

The Negative Rule of Exponents 

For any nonzero real number  and natural number  the negative rule of exponents states that 

EXAMPLE 5 

Using the Negative Exponent Rule 
Write each of the following quotients with a single base. Do not simplify further. Write answers with positive exponents. 

ⓐ   ⓑ   ⓒ  

Solution 

ⓐ   ⓑ  

ⓒ  

 TRY IT #5 Write each of the following quotients with a single base. Do not simplify further. Write answers 
with positive exponents. 

ⓐ   ⓑ   ⓒ  

EXAMPLE 6 

Using the Product and Quotient Rules 
Write each of the following products with a single base. Do not simplify further. Write answers with positive exponents. 

Access for free at openstax.org



1.2 • Exponents and Scientific Notation     29

ⓐ   ⓑ   ⓒ  
Solution 

ⓐ   ⓑ  

ⓒ  

 TRY IT #6 Write each of the following products with a single base. Do not simplify further. Write answers 
with positive exponents. 

ⓐ   ⓑ  

Finding the Power of a Product 
To simplify the power of a product of two exponential expressions, we can use the power of a product rule of exponents, 
which breaks up the power of a product of factors into the product of the powers of the factors. For instance, consider 

 We begin by using the associative and commutative properties of multiplication to regroup the factors. 

In other words, 

The Power of a Product Rule of Exponents 

For any real numbers  and  and any integer  the power of a product rule of exponents states that 

EXAMPLE 7 

Using the Power of a Product Rule 
Simplify each of the following products as much as possible using the power of a product rule. Write answers with 
positive exponents. 

ⓐ   ⓑ   ⓒ   ⓓ   ⓔ  
Solution 

Use the product and quotient rules and the new definitions to simplify each expression. 

ⓐ   ⓑ  

ⓒ   ⓓ  

ⓔ  

 TRY IT #7 Simplify each of the following products as much as possible using the power of a product rule. 
Write answers with positive exponents. 

ⓐ   ⓑ   ⓒ   ⓓ   ⓔ  

Finding the Power of a Quotient 
To simplify the power of a quotient of two expressions, we can use the power of a quotient rule, which states that the 



30     1 • Prerequisites

power of a quotient of factors is the quotient of the powers of the factors. For example, let’s look at the following 
example. 

Let’s rewrite the original problem differently and look at the result. 

It appears from the last two steps that we can use the power of a product rule as a power of a quotient rule. 

The Power of a Quotient Rule of Exponents 

For any real numbers  and  and any integer  the power of a quotient rule of exponents states that 

EXAMPLE 8 

Using the Power of a Quotient Rule 
Simplify each of the following quotients as much as possible using the power of a quotient rule. Write answers with 
positive exponents. 

ⓐ   ⓑ   ⓒ   ⓓ   ⓔ  

Solution 

ⓐ   ⓑ  

ⓒ   ⓓ  

ⓔ  

 TRY IT #8 Simplify each of the following quotients as much as possible using the power of a quotient rule. 
Write answers with positive exponents. 

ⓐ   ⓑ   ⓒ   ⓓ   ⓔ  

Simplifying Exponential Expressions 
Recall that to simplify an expression means to rewrite it by combining terms or exponents; in other words, to write the 
expression more simply with fewer terms. The rules for exponents may be combined to simplify expressions. 

Access for free at openstax.org



1.2 • Exponents and Scientific Notation     31

EXAMPLE 9 

Simplifying Exponential Expressions 
Simplify each expression and write the answer with positive exponents only. 

ⓐ   ⓑ   ⓒ   ⓓ  

ⓔ   ⓕ  

Solution 
ⓐ 

ⓑ 

ⓒ 

ⓓ 

ⓔ 

ⓕ 

 TRY IT #9 Simplify each expression and write the answer with positive exponents only. 



32     1 • Prerequisites

ⓐ   ⓑ   ⓒ   ⓓ  

ⓔ   ⓕ  

Using Scientific Notation 
Recall at the beginning of the section that we found the number  when describing bits of information in digital 
images. Other extreme numbers include the width of a human hair, which is about 0.00005 m, and the radius of an 
electron, which is about 0.00000000000047 m. How can we effectively work, read, compare, and calculate with numbers 
such as these? 
A shorthand method of writing very small and very large numbers is called scientific notation, in which we express 
numbers in terms of exponents of 10. To write a number in scientific notation, move the decimal point to the right of the 
first digit in the number. Write the digits as a decimal number between 1 and 10. Count the number of places n that you 
moved the decimal point. Multiply the decimal number by 10 raised to a power of n. If you moved the decimal left as in a 
very large number,  is positive. If you moved the decimal right as in a very small number,  is negative. 
For example, consider the number 2,780,418. Move the decimal left until it is to the right of the first nonzero digit, which 
is 2. 

We obtain 2.780418 by moving the decimal point 6 places to the left. Therefore, the exponent of 10 is 6, and it is positive 
because we moved the decimal point to the left. This is what we should expect for a large number. 

Working with small numbers is similar. Take, for example, the radius of an electron, 0.00000000000047 m. Perform the 
same series of steps as above, except move the decimal point to the right. 

Be careful not to include the leading 0 in your count. We move the decimal point 13 places to the right, so the exponent 
of 10 is 13. The exponent is negative because we moved the decimal point to the right. This is what we should expect for 
a small number. 

Scientific Notation 

A number is written in scientific notation if it is written in the form  where  and  is an integer. 

EXAMPLE 10 

Converting Standard Notation to Scientific Notation 
Write each number in scientific notation. 

ⓐ Distance to Andromeda Galaxy from Earth: 24,000,000,000,000,000,000,000 m 

ⓑ Diameter of Andromeda Galaxy: 1,300,000,000,000,000,000,000 m 

ⓒ Number of stars in Andromeda Galaxy: 1,000,000,000,000 

ⓓ Diameter of electron: 0.00000000000094 m 

ⓔ Probability of being struck by lightning in any single year: 0.00000143 

Access for free at openstax.org



1.2 • Exponents and Scientific Notation     33

Solution 
ⓐ 

ⓑ 

ⓒ 

ⓓ 

ⓔ 

Analysis 
Observe that, if the given number is greater than 1, as in examples a–c, the exponent of 10 is positive; and if the number 
is less than 1, as in examples d–e, the exponent is negative. 

 TRY IT #10 Write each number in scientific notation. 

ⓐ U.S. national debt per taxpayer (April 2014): $152,000 
ⓑ World population (April 2014): 7,158,000,000 
ⓒ World gross national income (April 2014): $85,500,000,000,000 
ⓓ Time for light to travel 1 m: 0.00000000334 s 
ⓔ Probability of winning lottery (match 6 of 49 possible numbers): 0.0000000715 

Converting from Scientific to Standard Notation 
To convert a number in scientific notation to standard notation, simply reverse the process. Move the decimal  places 
to the right if  is positive or  places to the left if  is negative and add zeros as needed. Remember, if  is positive, the 
absolute value of the number is greater than 1, and if  is negative, the absolute value of the number is less than one. 

EXAMPLE 11 

Converting Scientific Notation to Standard Notation 
Convert each number in scientific notation to standard notation. 

ⓐ   ⓑ   ⓒ   ⓓ  



34     1 • Prerequisites

Solution 
ⓐ ⓑ ⓒ ⓓ 

   

 TRY IT #11 Convert each number in scientific notation to standard notation. 

ⓐ   ⓑ   ⓒ   ⓓ  

Using Scientific Notation in Applications 
Scientific notation, used with the rules of exponents, makes calculating with large or small numbers much easier than 
doing so using standard notation. For example, suppose we are asked to calculate the number of atoms in 1 L of water. 
Each water molecule contains 3 atoms (2 hydrogen and 1 oxygen). The average drop of water contains around 

 molecules of water and 1 L of water holds about  average drops. Therefore, there are 
approximately  atoms in 1 L of water. We simply multiply the decimal 
terms and add the exponents. Imagine having to perform the calculation without using scientific notation! 
When performing calculations with scientific notation, be sure to write the answer in proper scientific notation. For 
example, consider the product  The answer is not in proper scientific notation 
because 35 is greater than 10. Consider 35 as  That adds a ten to the exponent of the answer. 

EXAMPLE 12 

Using Scientific Notation 
Perform the operations and write the answer in scientific notation. 

ⓐ   ⓑ   ⓒ  
ⓓ   ⓔ  

Solution 
ⓐ 

ⓑ 

ⓒ 

ⓓ 

Access for free at openstax.org



1.2 • Exponents and Scientific Notation     35

ⓔ 

 TRY IT #12 Perform the operations and write the answer in scientific notation. 

ⓐ   ⓑ  
ⓒ   ⓓ  
ⓔ  

EXAMPLE 13 

Applying Scientific Notation to Solve Problems 
In April 2014, the population of the United States was about 308,000,000 people. The national debt was about 
$17,547,000,000,000. Write each number in scientific notation, rounding figures to two decimal places, and find the 
amount of the debt per U.S. citizen. Write the answer in both scientific and standard notations. 

Solution 
The population was 

The national debt was 
To find the amount of debt per citizen, divide the national debt by the number of citizens. 

The debt per citizen at the time was about  or $57,000. 

 TRY IT #13 An average human body contains around 30,000,000,000,000 red blood cells. Each cell measures 
approximately 0.000008 m long. Write each number in scientific notation and find the total 
length if the cells were laid end-to-end. Write the answer in both scientific and standard 
notations. 

 MEDIA 

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with exponents and scientific notation. 

Exponential Notation (https://openstax.org/l/exponnot) 
Properties of Exponents (https://openstax.org/l/exponprops) 
Zero Exponent (https://openstax.org/l/zeroexponent) 
Simplify Exponent Expressions (https://openstax.org/l/exponexpres) 
Quotient Rule for Exponents (https://openstax.org/l/quotofexpon) 
Scientific Notation (https://openstax.org/l/scientificnota) 
Converting to Decimal Notation (https://openstax.org/l/decimalnota) 

 1.2 SECTION EXERCISES 
Verbal 

1 . Is  the same as  2 . When can you add two  3 . What is the purpose of 
Explain. exponents? scientific notation? 



36     1 • Prerequisites

4 . Explain what a negative 
exponent does. 

Numeric 

For the following exercises, simplify the given expression. Write answers with positive exponents. 

5 .  6 .  7 . 

8 .  9 .  10 . 

11 .  12 .  13 . 

14 . 

For the following exercises, write each expression with a single base. Do not simplify further. Write answers with positive 
exponents. 

15 .  16 .  17 . 

18 .  19 .  20 . 

For the following exercises, express the decimal in scientific notation. 
21 . 0.0000314  22 . 148,000,000 

For the following exercises, convert each number in scientific notation to standard notation. 

23 .  24 . 

Algebraic 

For the following exercises, simplify the given expression. Write answers with positive exponents. 

25 .  26 .  27 . 

28 .  29 .  30 . 

31 .  32 .  33 . 

34 .  35 .  36 . 

37 .  38 .  39 . 

40 .  41 .  42 . 

43 . 

Real-World Applications 

44 . To reach escape velocity, a  45 . A dime is the thinnest coin  46 . The average distance 
rocket must travel at the in U.S. currency. A dime’s between Earth and the Sun 
rate of  ft/min. thickness measures is 92,960,000 mi. Rewrite 
Rewrite the rate in  m. Rewrite the the distance using 
standard notation. number in standard scientific notation. 

notation. 

Access for free at openstax.org



1.2 • Exponents and Scientific Notation     37

47 . A terabyte is made of  48 . The Gross Domestic  49 . One picometer is 
approximately Product (GDP) for the approximately 
1,099,500,000,000 bytes. United States in the first  in. Rewrite 
Rewrite in scientific quarter of 2014 was this length using standard 
notation.  Rewrite notation. 

the GDP in standard 
notation. 

50 . The value of the services 
sector of the U.S. economy 
in the first quarter of 2012 
was $10,633.6 billion. 
Rewrite this amount in 
scientific notation. 

Technology 

For the following exercises, use a graphing calculator to simplify. Round the answers to the nearest hundredth. 

51 .  52 . 

Extensions 

For the following exercises, simplify the given expression. Write answers with positive exponents. 

53 .  54 .  55 . 

56 .  57 .  58 . Avogadro’s constant is 
used to calculate the 
number of particles in a 
mole. A mole is a basic unit 
in chemistry to measure 
the amount of a substance. 
The constant is 

 Write 
Avogadro’s constant in 
standard notation. 

59 . Planck’s constant is an 
important unit of measure 
in quantum physics. It 
describes the relationship 
between energy and 
frequency. The constant is 
written as 

 Write 
Planck’s constant in 
standard notation. 



38     1 • Prerequisites

1.3 Radicals and Rational Exponents 
Learning Objectives 
In this section, you will: 

Evaluate square roots. 
Use the product rule to simplify square roots. 
Use the quotient rule to simplify square roots. 
Add and subtract square roots. 
Rationalize denominators. 
Use rational roots. 

A hardware store sells 16-ft ladders and 24-ft ladders. A window is located 12 feet above the ground. A ladder needs to 
be purchased that will reach the window from a point on the ground 5 feet from the building. To find out the length of 
ladder needed, we can draw a right triangle as shown in Figure 1, and use the Pythagorean Theorem. 

Figure 1 

Now, we need to find out the length that, when squared, is 169, to determine which ladder to choose. In other words, we 
need to find a square root. In this section, we will investigate methods of finding solutions to problems such as this one. 

Evaluating Square Roots 
When the square root of a number is squared, the result is the original number. Since  the square root of  is 
The square root function is the inverse of the squaring function just as subtraction is the inverse of addition. To undo 
squaring, we take the square root. 
In general terms, if  is a positive real number, then the square root of  is a number that, when multiplied by itself, gives 

 The square root could be positive or negative because multiplying two negative numbers gives a positive number. The 
principal square root is the nonnegative number that when multiplied by itself equals  The square root obtained 
using a calculator is the principal square root. 

The principal square root of  is written as  The symbol is called a radical, the term under the symbol is called the 
radicand, and the entire expression is called a radical expression. 

Principal Square Root 

The principal square root of  is the nonnegative number that, when multiplied by itself, equals  It is written as a 
radical expression, with a symbol called a radical over the term called the radicand: 

 Q&A Does 

No. Although both  and  are  the radical symbol implies only a nonnegative root, the 

Access for free at openstax.org



1.3 • Radicals and Rational Exponents     39

principal square root. The principal square root of 25 is 

EXAMPLE 1 

Evaluating Square Roots 
Evaluate each expression. 

ⓐ   ⓑ   ⓒ   ⓓ  
Solution 

ⓐ   because  ⓑ   because  and 

ⓒ   because  ⓓ   because  and 

 Q&A For  can we find the square roots before adding? 

No.  This is not equivalent to  The order of operations 
requires us to add the terms in the radicand before finding the square root. 

 TRY IT #1 Evaluate each expression. 

ⓐ   ⓑ   ⓒ   ⓓ  

Using the Product Rule to Simplify Square Roots 
To simplify a square root, we rewrite it such that there are no perfect squares in the radicand. There are several 
properties of square roots that allow us to simplify complicated radical expressions. The first rule we will look at is the 
product rule for simplifying square roots, which allows us to separate the square root of a product of two numbers into 
the product of two separate rational expressions. For instance, we can rewrite  as  We can also use the 
product rule to express the product of multiple radical expressions as a single radical expression. 

The Product Rule for Simplifying Square Roots 

If  and  are nonnegative, the square root of the product  is equal to the product of the square roots of  and 

...
HOW TO 

Given a square root radical expression, use the product rule to simplify it. 

1. Factor any perfect squares from the radicand. 
2. Write the radical expression as a product of radical expressions. 
3. Simplify. 

EXAMPLE 2 

Using the Product Rule to Simplify Square Roots 
Simplify the radical expression. 

ⓐ   ⓑ  



40     1 • Prerequisites

Solution 
ⓐ 

ⓑ 

 TRY IT #2 Simplify 

...
HOW TO 

Given the product of multiple radical expressions, use the product rule to combine them into one radical 
expression. 

1. Express the product of multiple radical expressions as a single radical expression. 
2. Simplify. 

EXAMPLE 3 

Using the Product Rule to Simplify the Product of Multiple Square Roots 
Simplify the radical expression. 

Solution 

 TRY IT #3 Simplify  assuming 

Using the Quotient Rule to Simplify Square Roots 
Just as we can rewrite the square root of a product as a product of square roots, so too can we rewrite the square root of 
a quotient as a quotient of square roots, using the quotient rule for simplifying square roots. It can be helpful to 
separate the numerator and denominator of a fraction under a radical so that we can take their square roots separately. 
We can rewrite  as 

The Quotient Rule for Simplifying Square Roots 

The square root of the quotient  is equal to the quotient of the square roots of  and  where 

Access for free at openstax.org



1.3 • Radicals and Rational Exponents     41

...
HOW TO 

Given a radical expression, use the quotient rule to simplify it. 

1. Write the radical expression as the quotient of two radical expressions. 
2. Simplify the numerator and denominator. 

EXAMPLE 4 

Using the Quotient Rule to Simplify Square Roots 
Simplify the radical expression. 

Solution 

 TRY IT #4 Simplify 

EXAMPLE 5 

Using the Quotient Rule to Simplify an Expression with Two Square Roots 
Simplify the radical expression. 

Solution 

 TRY IT #5 Simplify 

Adding and Subtracting Square Roots 
We can add or subtract radical expressions only when they have the same radicand and when they have the same radical 
type such as square roots. For example, the sum of  and  is  However, it is often possible to simplify radical 
expressions, and that may change the radicand. The radical expression  can be written with a  in the radicand, as 

 so 
...

HOW TO 

Given a radical expression requiring addition or subtraction of square roots, simplify. 



42     1 • Prerequisites

1. Simplify each radical expression. 
2. Add or subtract expressions with equal radicands. 

EXAMPLE 6 

Adding Square Roots 
Add 

Solution 
We can rewrite  as  According the product rule, this becomes  The square root of  is 2, so the 
expression becomes  which is  Now the terms have the same radicand so we can add. 

 TRY IT #6 Add 

EXAMPLE 7 

Subtracting Square Roots 
Subtract 

Solution 
Factor 9 out of the first term so that both terms have equal radicands. 

So 

 TRY IT #7 Subtract 

Rationalizing Denominators 
When an expression involving square root radicals is written in simplest form, it will not contain a radical in the 
denominator. We can remove radicals from the denominators of fractions using a process called rationalizing the 
denominator. 
We know that multiplying by 1 does not change the value of an expression. We use this property of multiplication to 
change expressions that contain radicals in the denominator. To remove radicals from the denominators of fractions, 
multiply by the form of 1 that will eliminate the radical. 
For a denominator containing a single term, multiply by the radical in the denominator over itself. In other words, if the 
denominator is  multiply by 

For a denominator containing the sum or difference of a rational and an irrational term, multiply the numerator and 
denominator by the conjugate of the denominator, which is found by changing the sign of the radical portion of the 
denominator. If the denominator is  then the conjugate is 

Access for free at openstax.org



1.3 • Radicals and Rational Exponents     43

...
HOW TO 

Given an expression with a single square root radical term in the denominator, rationalize the denominator. 

a. Multiply the numerator and denominator by the radical in the denominator. 
b. Simplify. 

EXAMPLE 8 

Rationalizing a Denominator Containing a Single Term 
Write  in simplest form. 

Solution 
The radical in the denominator is  So multiply the fraction by  Then simplify. 

 TRY IT #8 Write  in simplest form. 

...
HOW TO 

Given an expression with a radical term and a constant in the denominator, rationalize the denominator. 

1. Find the conjugate of the denominator. 
2. Multiply the numerator and denominator by the conjugate. 
3. Use the distributive property. 
4. Simplify. 

EXAMPLE 9 

Rationalizing a Denominator Containing Two Terms 
Write  in simplest form. 

Solution 
Begin by finding the conjugate of the denominator by writing the denominator and changing the sign. So the conjugate 
of  is  Then multiply the fraction by 



44     1 • Prerequisites

 TRY IT #9 Write  in simplest form. 

Using Rational Roots 
Although square roots are the most common rational roots, we can also find cube roots, 4th roots, 5th roots, and more. 
Just as the square root function is the inverse of the squaring function, these roots are the inverse of their respective 
power functions. These functions can be useful when we need to determine the number that, when raised to a certain 
power, gives a certain number. 

Understanding nth Roots 
Suppose we know that  We want to find what number raised to the 3rd power is equal to 8. Since  we say 
that 2 is the cube root of 8. 
The nth root of  is a number that, when raised to the nth power, gives  For example,  is the 5th root of 
because  If  is a real number with at least one nth root, then the principal nth root of  is the number 
with the same sign as  that, when raised to the nth power, equals 

The principal nth root of  is written as  where  is a positive integer greater than or equal to 2. In the radical 
expression,  is called the index of the radical. 

Principal  th Root 

If  is a real number with at least one nth root, then the principal nth root of  written as  is the number with 
the same sign as  that, when raised to the nth power, equals  The index of the radical is 

EXAMPLE 10 

Simplifying nth Roots 
Simplify each of the following: 

ⓐ   ⓑ   ⓒ   ⓓ  
Solution 

ⓐ   because 

ⓑ First, express the product as a single radical expression.  because 

ⓒ  

ⓓ  

 TRY IT #10 Simplify. 

ⓐ   ⓑ   ⓒ  

Using Rational Exponents 
Radical expressions can also be written without using the radical symbol. We can use rational (fractional) exponents. 
The index must be a positive integer. If the index  is even, then  cannot be negative. 

We can also have rational exponents with numerators other than 1. In these cases, the exponent must be a fraction in 
lowest terms. We raise the base to a power and take an nth root. The numerator tells us the power and the denominator 
tells us the root. 

Access for free at openstax.org



1.3 • Radicals and Rational Exponents     45

All of the properties of exponents that we learned for integer exponents also hold for rational exponents. 

Rational Exponents 

Rational exponents are another way to express principal nth roots. The general form for converting between a radical 
expression with a radical symbol and one with a rational exponent is 

...
HOW TO 

Given an expression with a rational exponent, write the expression as a radical. 

1. Determine the power by looking at the numerator of the exponent. 
2. Determine the root by looking at the denominator of the exponent. 
3. Using the base as the radicand, raise the radicand to the power and use the root as the index. 

EXAMPLE 11 

Writing Rational Exponents as Radicals 
Write  as a radical. Simplify. 

Solution 
The 2 tells us the power and the 3 tells us the root. 

We know that  because  Because the cube root is easy to find, it is easiest to find the cube root 
before squaring for this problem. In general, it is easier to find the root first and then raise it to a power. 

 TRY IT #11 Write  as a radical. Simplify. 

EXAMPLE 12 

Writing Radicals as Rational Exponents 
Write  using a rational exponent. 

Solution 
The power is 2 and the root is 7, so the rational exponent will be  We get  Using properties of exponents, we get 

 TRY IT #12 Write  using a rational exponent. 



46     1 • Prerequisites

EXAMPLE 13 

Simplifying Rational Exponents 
Simplify: 

ⓐ   ⓑ  

Solution 
ⓐ 

ⓑ 
  

  

  

  

 TRY IT #13 Simplify 

 MEDIA 

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with radicals and rational exponents. 

Radicals (https://openstax.org/l/introradical) 
Rational Exponents (https://openstax.org/l/rationexpon) 
Simplify Radicals (https://openstax.org/l/simpradical) 
Rationalize Denominator (https://openstax.org/l/rationdenom) 

 1.3 SECTION EXERCISES 
Verbal 

1 . What does it mean when a  2 . Where would radicals come  3 . Every number will have two 
radical does not have an in the order of operations? square roots. What is the 
index? Is the expression Explain why. principal square root? 
equal to the radicand? 
Explain. 

4 . Can a radical with a negative 
radicand have a real square 
root? Why or why not? 

Numeric 

For the following exercises, simplify each expression. 

5 .  6 .  7 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



1.3 • Radicals and Rational Exponents     47

8 .  9 .  10 . 

11 .  12 .  13 . 

14 .  15 .  16 . 

17 .  18 .  19 . 

20 .  21 .  22 . 

23 .  24 .  25 . 

26 .  27 .  28 . 

29 .  30 .  31 . 

32 .  33 .  34 . 

Algebraic 

For the following exercises, simplify each expression. 

35 .  36 .  37 . 

38 .  39 .  40 . 

41 .  42 .  43 . 

44 .  45 .  46 . 

47 .  48 .  49 . 

50 .  51 .  52 . 

53 .  54 .  55 . 

56 .  57 .  58 . 

59 .  60 .  61 . 

62 .  63 .  64 . 



48     1 • Prerequisites

Real-World Applications 

65 . A guy wire for a suspension bridge runs from the  66 . A car accelerates at a rate of  where 
ground diagonally to the top of the closest pylon 
to make a triangle. We can use the Pythagorean t is the time in seconds after the car moves from 
Theorem to find the length of guy wire needed. rest. Simplify the expression. 
The square of the distance between the wire on 
the ground and the pylon on the ground is 90,000 
feet. The square of the height of the pylon is 
160,000 feet. So the length of the guy wire can be 
found by evaluating  What is 
the length of the guy wire? 

Extensions 

For the following exercises, simplify each expression. 

67 .  68 .  69 . 

70 .  71 .  72 . 

73 . 

1.4 Polynomials 
Learning Objectives 
In this section, you will: 

Identify the degree and leading coefficient of polynomials. 
Add and subtract polynomials. 
Multiply polynomials. 
Use FOIL to multiply binomials. 
Perform operations with polynomials of several variables. 

Maahi is building a little free library (a small house-shaped book repository), whose front is in the shape of a square 
topped with a triangle. There will be a rectangular door through which people can take and donate books. Maahi wants 
to find the area of the front of the library so that they can purchase the correct amount of paint. Using the 
measurements of the front of the house, shown in Figure 1, we can create an expression that combines several variable 
terms, allowing us to solve this problem and others like it. 

Figure 1 
First find the area of the square in square feet. 

Access for free at openstax.org



1.4 • Polynomials     49

Then find the area of the triangle in square feet. 

Next find the area of the rectangular door in square feet. 

The area of the front of the library can be found by adding the areas of the square and the triangle, and then subtracting 
the area of the rectangle. When we do this, we get  or  ft2. 

In this section, we will examine expressions such as this one, which combine several variable terms. 

Identifying the Degree and Leading Coefficient of Polynomials 
The formula just found is an example of a polynomial, which is a sum of or difference of terms, each consisting of a 
variable raised to a nonnegative integer power. A number multiplied by a variable raised to an exponent, such as  is 
known as a coefficient. Coefficients can be positive, negative, or zero, and can be whole numbers, decimals, or fractions. 
Each product  such as  is a term of a polynomial. If a term does not contain a variable, it is called a 
constant. 
A polynomial containing only one term, such as  is called a monomial. A polynomial containing two terms, such as 

 is called a binomial. A polynomial containing three terms, such as  is called a trinomial. 
We can find the degree of a polynomial by identifying the highest power of the variable that occurs in the polynomial. 
The term with the highest degree is called the leading term because it is usually written first. The coefficient of the 
leading term is called the leading coefficient. When a polynomial is written so that the powers are descending, we say 
that it is in standard form. 

Polynomials 

A polynomial is an expression that can be written in the form 

Each real number ai is called a coefficient. The number  that is not multiplied by a variable is called a constant. 
Each product  is a term of a polynomial. The highest power of the variable that occurs in the polynomial is called 
the degree of a polynomial. The leading term is the term with the highest power, and its coefficient is called the 
leading coefficient. 

...
HOW TO 

Given a polynomial expression, identify the degree and leading coefficient. 

1. Find the highest power of x to determine the degree. 
2. Identify the term containing the highest power of x to find the leading term. 
3. Identify the coefficient of the leading term. 



50     1 • Prerequisites

EXAMPLE 1 

Identifying the Degree and Leading Coefficient of a Polynomial 
For the following polynomials, identify the degree, the leading term, and the leading coefficient. 

ⓐ   ⓑ   ⓒ  
Solution 

ⓐ The highest power of x is 3, so the degree is 3. The leading term is the term containing that degree,  The 
leading coefficient is the coefficient of that term, 
ⓑ The highest power of t is  so the degree is  The leading term is the term containing that degree,  The 
leading coefficient is the coefficient of that term, 
ⓒ The highest power of p is  so the degree is  The leading term is the term containing that degree,  The 
leading coefficient is the coefficient of that term, 

 TRY IT #1 Identify the degree, leading term, and leading coefficient of the polynomial 

Adding and Subtracting Polynomials 
We can add and subtract polynomials by combining like terms, which are terms that contain the same variables raised to 
the same exponents. For example,  and  are like terms, and can be added to get  but  and  are not 
like terms, and therefore cannot be added. 

...
HOW TO 

Given multiple polynomials, add or subtract them to simplify the expressions. 

1. Combine like terms. 
2. Simplify and write in standard form. 

EXAMPLE 2 

Adding Polynomials 
Find the sum. 

Solution 
  
  

Analysis 
We can check our answers to these types of problems using a graphing calculator. To check, graph the problem as given 
along with the simplified answer. The two graphs should be equivalent. Be sure to use the same window to compare the 
graphs. Using different windows can make the expressions seem equivalent when they are not. 

 TRY IT #2 Find the sum. 

Access for free at openstax.org



1.4 • Polynomials     51

EXAMPLE 3 

Subtracting Polynomials 
Find the difference. 

Solution 

Analysis 
Note that finding the difference between two polynomials is the same as adding the opposite of the second polynomial 
to the first. 

 TRY IT #3 Find the difference. 

Multiplying Polynomials 
Multiplying polynomials is a bit more challenging than adding and subtracting polynomials. We must use the distributive 
property to multiply each term in the first polynomial by each term in the second polynomial. We then combine like 
terms. We can also use a shortcut called the FOIL method when multiplying binomials. Certain special products follow 
patterns that we can memorize and use instead of multiplying the polynomials by hand each time. We will look at a 
variety of ways to multiply polynomials. 

Multiplying Polynomials Using the Distributive Property 
To multiply a number by a polynomial, we use the distributive property. The number must be distributed to each term of 
the polynomial. We can distribute the  in  to obtain the equivalent expression  When multiplying 
polynomials, the distributive property allows us to multiply each term of the first polynomial by each term of the second. 
We then add the products together and combine like terms to simplify. 

...
HOW TO 

Given the multiplication of two polynomials, use the distributive property to simplify the expression. 

1. Multiply each term of the first polynomial by each term of the second. 
2. Combine like terms. 
3. Simplify. 

EXAMPLE 4 

Multiplying Polynomials Using the Distributive Property 
Find the product. 



52     1 • Prerequisites

Solution 
  
  
  
  

Analysis 
We can use a table to keep track of our work, as shown in Table 1. Write one polynomial across the top and the other 
down the side. For each box in the table, multiply the term for that row by the term for that column. Then add all of the 
terms together, combine like terms, and simplify. 

Table 1 

 TRY IT #4 Find the product. 

Using FOIL to Multiply Binomials 
A shortcut called FOIL is sometimes used to find the product of two binomials. It is called FOIL because we multiply the 
first terms, the outer terms, the inner terms, and then the last terms of each binomial. 

The FOIL method arises out of the distributive property. We are simply multiplying each term of the first binomial by 
each term of the second binomial, and then combining like terms. 

...
HOW TO 

Given two binomials, use FOIL to simplify the expression. 

1. Multiply the first terms of each binomial. 
2. Multiply the outer terms of the binomials. 
3. Multiply the inner terms of the binomials. 
4. Multiply the last terms of each binomial. 
5. Add the products. 
6. Combine like terms and simplify. 

Access for free at openstax.org



1.4 • Polynomials     53

EXAMPLE 5 

Using FOIL to Multiply Binomials 
Use FOIL to find the product. 

Solution 
Find the product of the first terms. 

Find the product of the outer terms. 

Find the product of the inner terms. 

Find the product of the last terms. 

 TRY IT #5 Use FOIL to find the product. 

Perfect Square Trinomials 
Certain binomial products have special forms. When a binomial is squared, the result is called a perfect square 
trinomial. We can find the square by multiplying the binomial by itself. However, there is a special form that each of 
these perfect square trinomials takes, and memorizing the form makes squaring binomials much easier and faster. Let’s 
look at a few perfect square trinomials to familiarize ourselves with the form. 

Notice that the first term of each trinomial is the square of the first term of the binomial and, similarly, the last term of 
each trinomial is the square of the last term of the binomial. The middle term is double the product of the two terms. 
Lastly, we see that the first sign of the trinomial is the same as the sign of the binomial. 

Perfect Square Trinomials 

When a binomial is squared, the result is the first term squared added to double the product of both terms and the 
last term squared. 



54     1 • Prerequisites

...
HOW TO 

Given a binomial, square it using the formula for perfect square trinomials. 

1. Square the first term of the binomial. 
2. Square the last term of the binomial. 
3. For the middle term of the trinomial, double the product of the two terms. 
4. Add and simplify. 

EXAMPLE 6 

Expanding Perfect Squares 
Expand 

Solution 
Begin by squaring the first term and the last term. For the middle term of the trinomial, double the product of the two 
terms. 

Simplify. 

 TRY IT #6 Expand 

Difference of Squares 
Another special product is called the difference of squares, which occurs when we multiply a binomial by another 
binomial with the same terms but the opposite sign. Let’s see what happens when we multiply  using the 
FOIL method. 

The middle term drops out, resulting in a difference of squares. Just as we did with the perfect squares, let’s look at a few 
examples. 

Because the sign changes in the second binomial, the outer and inner terms cancel each other out, and we are left only 
with the square of the first term minus the square of the last term. 

 Q&A Is there a special form for the sum of squares? 

No. The difference of squares occurs because the opposite signs of the binomials cause the middle 
terms to disappear. There are no two binomials that multiply to equal a sum of squares. 

Difference of Squares 

When a binomial is multiplied by a binomial with the same terms separated by the opposite sign, the result is the 
square of the first term minus the square of the last term. 

Access for free at openstax.org



1.4 • Polynomials     55

...
HOW TO 

Given a binomial multiplied by a binomial with the same terms but the opposite sign, find the difference of 
squares. 

1. Square the first term of the binomials. 
2. Square the last term of the binomials. 
3. Subtract the square of the last term from the square of the first term. 

EXAMPLE 7 

Multiplying Binomials Resulting in a Difference of Squares 
Multiply 

Solution 
Square the first term to get  Square the last term to get  Subtract the square of the last term from 
the square of the first term to find the product of 

 TRY IT #7 Multiply 

Performing Operations with Polynomials of Several Variables 
We have looked at polynomials containing only one variable. However, a polynomial can contain several variables. All of 
the same rules apply when working with polynomials containing several variables. Consider an example: 

EXAMPLE 8 

Multiplying Polynomials Containing Several Variables 
Multiply 

Solution 
Follow the same steps that we used to multiply polynomials containing only one variable. 

 TRY IT #8 Multiply 

 MEDIA 

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with polynomials. 

Adding and Subtracting Polynomials (https://openstax.org/l/addsubpoly) 
Multiplying Polynomials (https://openstax.org/l/multiplpoly) 
Special Products of Polynomials (https://openstax.org/l/specialpolyprod) 



56     1 • Prerequisites

 1.4 SECTION EXERCISES 
Verbal 

1 . Evaluate the following  2 . Many times, multiplying two  3 . You can multiply 
statement: The degree of a binomials with two variables polynomials with any 
polynomial in standard form results in a trinomial. This is number of terms and any 
is the exponent of the not the case when there is a number of variables using 
leading term. Explain why difference of two squares. four basic steps over and 
the statement is true or Explain why the product in over until you reach the 
false. this case is also a binomial. expanded polynomial. What 

are the four steps? 
4 . State whether the following 

statement is true and 
explain why or why not: A 
trinomial is always a higher 
degree than a monomial. 

Algebraic 

For the following exercises, identify the degree of the polynomial. 

5 .  6 .  7 . 

8 .  9 .  10 . 

For the following exercises, find the sum or difference. 

11 .  12 . 

13 .  14 . 

15 .  16 . 

For the following exercises, find the product. 

17 .  18 .  19 . 

20 .  21 .  22 . 

23 . 

For the following exercises, expand the binomial. 

24 .  25 .  26 . 

27 .  28 .  29 . 

30 . 

For the following exercises, multiply the binomials. 
31 .  32 .  33 . 
34 .  35 .  36 . 
37 . 

For the following exercises, multiply the polynomials. 

38 .  39 .  40 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



1.5 • Factoring Polynomials     57

41 .  42 .  43 . 

44 .  45 .  46 . 

47 .  48 .  49 . 

50 .  51 .  52 . 

Real-World Applications 

53 . A developer wants to purchase a plot of land to  54 . A prospective buyer wants to know how much 
build a house. The area of the plot can be grain a specific silo can hold. The area of the floor 
described by the following expression: of the silo is  The height of the silo is 

 where x is measured in meters.  where x is measured in feet. Expand the 
Multiply the binomials to find the area of the plot square and multiply by the height to find the 
in standard form. expression that shows how much grain the silo 

can hold. 

Extensions 

For the following exercises, perform the given operations. 

55 .  56 .  57 . 

1.5 Factoring Polynomials 
Learning Objectives 
In this section, you will: 

Factor the greatest common factor of a polynomial. 
Factor a trinomial. 
Factor by grouping. 
Factor a perfect square trinomial. 
Factor a difference of squares. 
Factor the sum and difference of cubes. 
Factor expressions using fractional or negative exponents. 

Imagine that we are trying to find the area of a lawn so that we can determine how much grass seed to purchase. The 
lawn is the green portion in Figure 1. 

Figure 1 
The area of the entire region can be found using the formula for the area of a rectangle. 

The areas of the portions that do not require grass seed need to be subtracted from the area of the entire region. The 
two square regions each have an area of  units2. The other rectangular region has one side of length 

 and one side of length  giving an area of  units2. So the region that must be 



58     1 • Prerequisites

subtracted has an area of  units2. 

The area of the region that requires grass seed is found by subtracting  units2. This area can also be 
expressed in factored form as  units2. We can confirm that this is an equivalent expression by multiplying. 
Many polynomial expressions can be written in simpler forms by factoring. In this section, we will look at a variety of 
methods that can be used to factor polynomial expressions. 

Factoring the Greatest Common Factor of a Polynomial 
When we study fractions, we learn that the greatest common factor (GCF) of two numbers is the largest number that 
divides evenly into both numbers. For instance,  is the GCF of  and  because it is the largest number that divides 
evenly into both  and  The GCF of polynomials works the same way:  is the GCF of  and  because it is the 
largest polynomial that divides evenly into both  and 
When factoring a polynomial expression, our first step should be to check for a GCF. Look for the GCF of the coefficients, 
and then look for the GCF of the variables. 

Greatest Common Factor 

The greatest common factor (GCF) of polynomials is the largest polynomial that divides evenly into the polynomials. 

...
HOW TO 

Given a polynomial expression, factor out the greatest common factor. 

1. Identify the GCF of the coefficients. 
2. Identify the GCF of the variables. 
3. Combine to find the GCF of the expression. 
4. Determine what the GCF needs to be multiplied by to obtain each term in the expression. 
5. Write the factored expression as the product of the GCF and the sum of the terms we need to multiply by. 

EXAMPLE 1 

Factoring the Greatest Common Factor 
Factor 

Solution 
First, find the GCF of the expression. The GCF of 6, 45, and 21 is 3. The GCF of  , and  is  . (Note that the GCF of a 
set of expressions in the form  will always be the exponent of lowest degree.) And the GCF of  , and  is  . 
Combine these to find the GCF of the polynomial,  . 
Next, determine what the GCF needs to be multiplied by to obtain each term of the polynomial. We find that 

 , and 

Finally, write the factored expression as the product of the GCF and the sum of the terms we needed to multiply by. 

Analysis 
After factoring, we can check our work by multiplying. Use the distributive property to confirm that 

 TRY IT #1 Factor  by pulling out the GCF. 

Access for free at openstax.org



1.5 • Factoring Polynomials     59

Factoring a Trinomial with Leading Coefficient 1 
Although we should always begin by looking for a GCF, pulling out the GCF is not the only way that polynomial 
expressions can be factored. The polynomial  has a GCF of 1, but it can be written as the product of the 
factors  and 

Trinomials of the form  can be factored by finding two numbers with a product of  and a sum of  The 
trinomial  for example, can be factored using the numbers  and  because the product of those numbers 
is  and their sum is  The trinomial can be rewritten as the product of  and 

Factoring a Trinomial with Leading Coefficient 1 

A trinomial of the form  can be written in factored form as  where  and 

 Q&A Can every trinomial be factored as a product of binomials? 

No. Some polynomials cannot be factored. These polynomials are said to be prime. 

...
HOW TO 

Given a trinomial in the form  factor it. 

1. List factors of 
2. Find  and  a pair of factors of  with a sum of 
3. Write the factored expression 

EXAMPLE 2 

Factoring a Trinomial with Leading Coefficient 1 
Factor 

Solution 
We have a trinomial with leading coefficient  and  We need to find two numbers with a product of 
and a sum of  In the table below, we list factors until we find a pair with the desired sum. 

Factors of Sum of Factors 

14 

2 

Now that we have identified  and  as  and  write the factored form as 

Analysis 
We can check our work by multiplying. Use FOIL to confirm that 

 Q&A Does the order of the factors matter? 

No. Multiplication is commutative, so the order of the factors does not matter. 



60     1 • Prerequisites

 TRY IT #2 Factor 

Factoring by Grouping 
Trinomials with leading coefficients other than 1 are slightly more complicated to factor. For these trinomials, we can 
factor by grouping by dividing the x term into the sum of two terms, factoring each portion of the expression 
separately, and then factoring out the GCF of the entire expression. The trinomial  can be rewritten as 

 using this process. We begin by rewriting the original expression as  and then factor 
each portion of the expression to obtain  We then pull out the GCF of  to find the factored 
expression. 

Factor by Grouping 

To factor a trinomial in the form  by grouping, we find two numbers with a product of  and a sum of 
We use these numbers to divide the  term into the sum of two terms and factor each portion of the expression 
separately, then factor out the GCF of the entire expression. 

...
HOW TO 

Given a trinomial in the form  factor by grouping. 
1. List factors of 
2. Find  and  a pair of factors of  with a sum of 
3. Rewrite the original expression as 
4. Pull out the GCF of 
5. Pull out the GCF of 
6. Factor out the GCF of the expression. 

EXAMPLE 3 

Factoring a Trinomial by Grouping 
Factor  by grouping. 

Solution 
We have a trinomial with  and  First, determine  We need to find two numbers with a 
product of  and a sum of  In the table below, we list factors until we find a pair with the desired sum. 

Factors of Sum of Factors 

29 

13 

7 

So  and 

Access for free at openstax.org



1.5 • Factoring Polynomials     61

​
Analysis 

We can check our work by multiplying. Use FOIL to confirm that 

 TRY IT #3 Factor 

ⓐ   ⓑ  

Factoring a Perfect Square Trinomial 
A perfect square trinomial is a trinomial that can be written as the square of a binomial. Recall that when a binomial is 
squared, the result is the square of the first term added to twice the product of the two terms and the square of the last 
term. 

We can use this equation to factor any perfect square trinomial. 

Perfect Square Trinomials 

A perfect square trinomial can be written as the square of a binomial: 

...
HOW TO 

Given a perfect square trinomial, factor it into the square of a binomial. 

1. Confirm that the first and last term are perfect squares. 
2. Confirm that the middle term is twice the product of 
3. Write the factored form as 

EXAMPLE 4 

Factoring a Perfect Square Trinomial 
Factor 

Solution 
Notice that  and  are perfect squares because  and  Then check to see if the middle term is 
twice the product of  and  The middle term is, indeed, twice the product:  Therefore, the trinomial is 
a perfect square trinomial and can be written as 

 TRY IT #4 Factor 

Factoring a Difference of Squares 
A difference of squares is a perfect square subtracted from a perfect square. Recall that a difference of squares can be 
rewritten as factors containing the same terms but opposite signs because the middle terms cancel each other out when 



62     1 • Prerequisites

the two factors are multiplied. 

We can use this equation to factor any differences of squares. 

Differences of Squares 

A difference of squares can be rewritten as two factors containing the same terms but opposite signs. 

...
HOW TO 

Given a difference of squares, factor it into binomials. 

1. Confirm that the first and last term are perfect squares. 
2. Write the factored form as 

EXAMPLE 5 

Factoring a Difference of Squares 
Factor 

Solution 
Notice that  and  are perfect squares because  and  The polynomial represents a difference of 
squares and can be rewritten as 

 TRY IT #5 Factor 

 Q&A Is there a formula to factor the sum of squares? 

No. A sum of squares cannot be factored. 

Factoring the Sum and Difference of Cubes 
Now, we will look at two new special products: the sum and difference of cubes. Although the sum of squares cannot be 
factored, the sum of cubes can be factored into a binomial and a trinomial. 

Similarly, the difference of cubes can be factored into a binomial and a trinomial, but with different signs. 

We can use the acronym SOAP to remember the signs when factoring the sum or difference of cubes. The first letter of 
each word relates to the signs: Same Opposite Always Positive. For example, consider the following example. 

The sign of the first 2 is the same as the sign between  The sign of the  term is opposite the sign between 
 And the sign of the last term, 4, is always positive. 

Sum and Difference of Cubes 

We can factor the sum of two cubes as 

Access for free at openstax.org



1.5 • Factoring Polynomials     63

We can factor the difference of two cubes as 

...
HOW TO 

Given a sum of cubes or difference of cubes, factor it. 

1. Confirm that the first and last term are cubes,  or 
2. For a sum of cubes, write the factored form as  For a difference of cubes, write the 

factored form as 

EXAMPLE 6 

Factoring a Sum of Cubes 
Factor 

Solution 
Notice that  and  are cubes because  Rewrite the sum of cubes as 

Analysis 
After writing the sum of cubes this way, we might think we should check to see if the trinomial portion can be factored 
further. However, the trinomial portion cannot be factored, so we do not need to check. 

 TRY IT #6 Factor the sum of cubes: 

EXAMPLE 7 

Factoring a Difference of Cubes 
Factor 

Solution 
Notice that  and  are cubes because  and  Write the difference of cubes as 

Analysis 
Just as with the sum of cubes, we will not be able to further factor the trinomial portion. 

 TRY IT #7 Factor the difference of cubes: 

Factoring Expressions with Fractional or Negative Exponents 
Expressions with fractional or negative exponents can be factored by pulling out a GCF. Look for the variable or exponent 
that is common to each term of the expression and pull out that variable or exponent raised to the lowest power. These 
expressions follow the same factoring rules as those with integer exponents. For instance,  can be factored 
by pulling out  and being rewritten as 



64     1 • Prerequisites

EXAMPLE 8 

Factoring an Expression with Fractional or Negative Exponents 

Factor 

Solution 
Factor out the term with the lowest value of the exponent. In this case, that would be 

 TRY IT #8 Factor 

 MEDIA 

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with factoring polynomials. 

Identify GCF (https://openstax.org/l/findgcftofact) 
Factor Trinomials when a Equals 1 (https://openstax.org/l/facttrinom1) 
Factor Trinomials when a is not equal to 1 (https://openstax.org/l/facttrinom2) 
Factor Sum or Difference of Cubes (https://openstax.org/l/sumdifcube) 

 1.5 SECTION EXERCISES 
Verbal 

1 . If the terms of a polynomial  2 . A polynomial is factorable,  3 . How do you factor by 
do not have a GCF, does that but it is not a perfect square grouping? 
mean it is not factorable? trinomial or a difference of 
Explain. two squares. Can you factor 

the polynomial without 
finding the GCF? 

Algebraic 

For the following exercises, find the greatest common factor. 

4 .  5 .  6 . 

7 .  8 .  9 . 

For the following exercises, factor by grouping. 

10 .  11 .  12 . 

13 .  14 .  15 . 

For the following exercises, factor the polynomial. 

16 .  17 .  18 . 

19 .  20 .  21 . 

22 .  23 .  24 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



1.5 • Factoring Polynomials     65

25 .  26 .  27 . 

28 .  29 .  30 . 

31 .  32 .  33 . 

34 .  35 .  36 . 

For the following exercises, factor the polynomials. 

37 .  38 .  39 . 

40 .  41 .  42 . 

43 .  44 .  45 . 

46 .  47.  48 . 

49 .  50. 

Real-World Applications 

For the following exercises, consider this scenario: 

Charlotte has appointed a chairperson to lead a city beautification project. The first act is to install statues and fountains 
in one of the city’s parks. The park is a rectangle with an area of  m2, as shown in the figure below. The 
length and width of the park are perfect factors of the area. 

51 . Factor by grouping to find  52 . A statue is to be placed in  53 . At the northwest corner of 
the length and width of the the center of the park. The the park, the city is going 
park. area of the base of the to install a fountain. The 

statue is area of the base of the 
 Factor fountain is 

the area to find the lengths Factor the area to find the 
of the sides of the statue. lengths of the sides of the 

fountain. 

For the following exercise, consider the following scenario: 

A school is installing a flagpole in the central plaza. The plaza is a square with side length 100 yd. as shown in the figure 
below. The flagpole will take up a square plot with area  yd2. 

54 . Find the length of the base of the flagpole by 
factoring. 



66     1 • Prerequisites

Extensions 

For the following exercises, factor the polynomials completely. 

55 .  56 .  57 . 

58 .  59 . 

1.6 Rational Expressions 
Learning Objectives 
In this section, you will: 

Simplify rational expressions. 
Multiply rational expressions. 
Divide rational expressions. 
Add and subtract rational expressions. 
Simplify complex rational expressions. 

A pastry shop has fixed costs of  per week and variable costs of  per box of pastries. The shop’s costs per week in 
terms of  the number of boxes made, is  We can divide the costs per week by the number of boxes made to 
determine the cost per box of pastries. 

Notice that the result is a polynomial expression divided by a second polynomial expression. In this section, we will 
explore quotients of polynomial expressions. 

Simplifying Rational Expressions 
The quotient of two polynomial expressions is called a rational expression. We can apply the properties of fractions to 
rational expressions, such as simplifying the expressions by canceling common factors from the numerator and the 
denominator. To do this, we first need to factor both the numerator and denominator. Let’s start with the rational 
expression shown. 

We can factor the numerator and denominator to rewrite the expression. 

Then we can simplify that expression by canceling the common factor 

...
HOW TO 

Given a rational expression, simplify it. 

1. Factor the numerator and denominator. 
2. Cancel any common factors. 

EXAMPLE 1 

Simplifying Rational Expressions 
Simplify 

Access for free at openstax.org



1.6 • Rational Expressions     67

Solution 

Analysis 
We can cancel the common factor because any expression divided by itself is equal to 1. 

 Q&A Can the  term be cancelled in Example 1? 

No. A factor is an expression that is multiplied by another expression. The  term is not a factor of the 
numerator or the denominator. 

 TRY IT #1 Simplify 

Multiplying Rational Expressions 
Multiplication of rational expressions works the same way as multiplication of any other fractions. We multiply the 
numerators to find the numerator of the product, and then multiply the denominators to find the denominator of the 
product. Before multiplying, it is helpful to factor the numerators and denominators just as we did when simplifying 
rational expressions. We are often able to simplify the product of rational expressions. 

...
HOW TO 

Given two rational expressions, multiply them. 

1. Factor the numerator and denominator. 
2. Multiply the numerators. 
3. Multiply the denominators. 
4. Simplify. 

EXAMPLE 2 

Multiplying Rational Expressions 
Multiply the rational expressions and show the product in simplest form: 

Solution 

 TRY IT #2 Multiply the rational expressions and show the product in simplest form: 



68     1 • Prerequisites

Dividing Rational Expressions 
Division of rational expressions works the same way as division of other fractions. To divide a rational expression by 
another rational expression, multiply the first expression by the reciprocal of the second. Using this approach, we would 
rewrite  as the product  Once the division expression has been rewritten as a multiplication expression, 
we can multiply as we did before. 

...
HOW TO 

Given two rational expressions, divide them. 

1. Rewrite as the first rational expression multiplied by the reciprocal of the second. 
2. Factor the numerators and denominators. 
3. Multiply the numerators. 
4. Multiply the denominators. 
5. Simplify. 

EXAMPLE 3 

Dividing Rational Expressions 
Divide the rational expressions and express the quotient in simplest form: 

Solution 

 TRY IT #3 Divide the rational expressions and express the quotient in simplest form: 

Adding and Subtracting Rational Expressions 
Adding and subtracting rational expressions works just like adding and subtracting numerical fractions. To add fractions, 
we need to find a common denominator. Let’s look at an example of fraction addition. 

We have to rewrite the fractions so they share a common denominator before we are able to add. We must do the same 
thing when adding or subtracting rational expressions. 
The easiest common denominator to use will be the least common denominator, or LCD. The LCD is the smallest 
multiple that the denominators have in common. To find the LCD of two rational expressions, we factor the expressions 
and multiply all of the distinct factors. For instance, if the factored denominators were  and 

Access for free at openstax.org



1.6 • Rational Expressions     69

then the LCD would be 
Once we find the LCD, we need to multiply each expression by the form of 1 that will change the denominator to the LCD. 
We would need to multiply the expression with a denominator of  by  and the expression with a 
denominator of  by 

...
HOW TO 

Given two rational expressions, add or subtract them. 

1. Factor the numerator and denominator. 
2. Find the LCD of the expressions. 
3. Multiply the expressions by a form of 1 that changes the denominators to the LCD. 
4. Add or subtract the numerators. 
5. Simplify. 

EXAMPLE 4 

Adding Rational Expressions 
Add the rational expressions: 

Solution 

First, we have to find the LCD. In this case, the LCD will be  We then multiply each expression by the appropriate form 
of 1 to obtain  as the denominator for each fraction. 

Now that the expressions have the same denominator, we simply add the numerators to find the sum. 

Analysis 
Multiplying by  or  does not change the value of the original expression because any number divided by itself is 1, 
and multiplying an expression by 1 gives the original expression. 

EXAMPLE 5 

Subtracting Rational Expressions 
Subtract the rational expressions: 



70     1 • Prerequisites

Solution 

 Q&A Do we have to use the LCD to add or subtract rational expressions? 

No. Any common denominator will work, but it is easiest to use the LCD. 

 TRY IT #4 Subtract the rational expressions: 

Simplifying Complex Rational Expressions 
A complex rational expression is a rational expression that contains additional rational expressions in the numerator, the 
denominator, or both. We can simplify complex rational expressions by rewriting the numerator and denominator as 
single rational expressions and dividing. The complex rational expression  can be simplified by rewriting the 

numerator as the fraction  and combining the expressions in the denominator as  We can then rewrite the 
expression as a multiplication problem using the reciprocal of the denominator. We get  which is equal to 

...
HOW TO 

Given a complex rational expression, simplify it. 

1. Combine the expressions in the numerator into a single rational expression by adding or subtracting. 
2. Combine the expressions in the denominator into a single rational expression by adding or subtracting. 
3. Rewrite as the numerator divided by the denominator. 
4. Rewrite as multiplication. 
5. Multiply. 
6. Simplify. 

EXAMPLE 6 

Simplifying Complex Rational Expressions 

Simplify:  . 

Solution 
Begin by combining the expressions in the numerator into one expression. 

  

  

Access for free at openstax.org



1.6 • Rational Expressions     71

Now the numerator is a single rational expression and the denominator is a single rational expression. 

We can rewrite this as division, and then multiplication. 

 TRY IT #5 Simplify: 

 Q&A Can a complex rational expression always be simplified? 

Yes. We can always rewrite a complex rational expression as a simplified rational expression. 

 MEDIA 

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with rational expressions. 

Simplify Rational Expressions (https://openstax.org/l/simpratexpress) 
Multiply and Divide Rational Expressions (https://openstax.org/l/multdivratex) 
Add and Subtract Rational Expressions (https://openstax.org/l/addsubratex) 
Simplify a Complex Fraction (https://openstax.org/l/complexfract) 

 1.6 SECTION EXERCISES 
Verbal 

1 . How can you use factoring  2 . How do you use the LCD to  3 . Tell whether the following 
to simplify rational combine two rational statement is true or false 
expressions? expressions? and explain why: You only 

need to find the LCD when 
adding or subtracting 
rational expressions. 

Algebraic 

For the following exercises, simplify the rational expressions. 

4 .  5 .  6 . 

7 .  8 .  9 . 

10 .  11 .  12 . 

13 . 

For the following exercises, multiply the rational expressions and express the product in simplest form. 

14 .  15 .  16 . 



72     1 • Prerequisites

17 .  18 .  19 . 

20 .  21 .  22 . 

23 . 

For the following exercises, divide the rational expressions. 

24 .  25 .  26 . 

27 .  28 .  29 . 

30 .  31 .  32 . 

For the following exercises, add and subtract the rational expressions, and then simplify. 

33 .  34 .  35 . 

36 .  37 .  38 . 

39 .  40 .  41 . 

For the following exercises, simplify the rational expression. 

42 .  43 .  44 . 

45 .  46 .  47 . 

48 .  49 .  50 . 

Real-World Applications 

51 . Brenda is placing tile on her  52 . The area of Lijuan's yard is  53 . Elroi wants to mulch his 
bathroom floor. The area of the  ft2. A patch of garden. His garden is 
floor is  ft2. The area sod has an area of  ft2. One bag 
of one tile is  To find  ft2. Divide of mulch covers 
the number of tiles needed, the two areas and simplify ft2. Divide the expressions 
simplify the rational expression: to find how many pieces of and simplify to find how 

sod Lijuan needs to cover many bags of mulch Elroi 
her yard. needs to mulch his garden. 

Access for free at openstax.org



1.6 • Rational Expressions     73

Extensions 

For the following exercises, perform the given operations and simplify. 

54 .  55 .  56 . 

57 . 



74     1 • Chapter Review

Chapter Review 
Key Terms 
algebraic expression  constants and variables combined using addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division 
associative property of addition  the sum of three numbers may be grouped differently without affecting the result; in 

symbols, 
associative property of multiplication  the product of three numbers may be grouped differently without affecting 

the result; in symbols, 
base  in exponential notation, the expression that is being multiplied 
binomial a polynomial containing two terms 
coefficient any real number  in a polynomial in the form 
commutative property of addition  two numbers may be added in either order without affecting the result; in 

symbols, 
commutative property of multiplication  two numbers may be multiplied in any order without affecting the result; in 

symbols, 
constant  a quantity that does not change value 
degree the highest power of the variable that occurs in a polynomial 
difference of squares the binomial that results when a binomial is multiplied by a binomial with the same terms, but 

the opposite sign 
distributive property  the product of a factor times a sum is the sum of the factor times each term in the sum; in 

symbols, 
equation  a mathematical statement indicating that two expressions are equal 
exponent  in exponential notation, the raised number or variable that indicates how many times the base is being 

multiplied 
exponential notation  a shorthand method of writing products of the same factor 
factor by grouping  a method for factoring a trinomial in the form  by dividing the x term into the sum of 

two terms, factoring each portion of the expression separately, and then factoring out the GCF of the entire 
expression 

formula  an equation expressing a relationship between constant and variable quantities 
greatest common factor  the largest polynomial that divides evenly into each polynomial 
identity property of addition  there is a unique number, called the additive identity, 0, which, when added to a 

number, results in the original number; in symbols, 
identity property of multiplication  there is a unique number, called the multiplicative identity, 1, which, when 

multiplied by a number, results in the original number; in symbols, 
index the number above the radical sign indicating the nth root 
integers  the set consisting of the natural numbers, their opposites, and 0: 
inverse property of addition  for every real number  there is a unique number, called the additive inverse (or 

opposite), denoted  which, when added to the original number, results in the additive identity, 0; in symbols, 

inverse property of multiplication  for every non-zero real number  there is a unique number, called the 
multiplicative inverse (or reciprocal), denoted  which, when multiplied by the original number, results in the 
multiplicative identity, 1; in symbols, 

irrational numbers  the set of all numbers that are not rational; they cannot be written as either a terminating or 
repeating decimal; they cannot be expressed as a fraction of two integers 

leading coefficient the coefficient of the leading term 
leading term  the term containing the highest degree 
least common denominator the smallest multiple that two denominators have in common 
monomial a polynomial containing one term 
natural numbers  the set of counting numbers: 
order of operations  a set of rules governing how mathematical expressions are to be evaluated, assigning priorities to 

operations 
perfect square trinomial  the trinomial that results when a binomial is squared 
polynomial a sum of terms each consisting of a variable raised to a nonnegative integer power 
principal nth root  the number with the same sign as  that when raised to the nth power equals 
principal square root  the nonnegative square root of a number  that, when multiplied by itself, equals 
radical  the symbol used to indicate a root 
radical expression  an expression containing a radical symbol 
radicand  the number under the radical symbol 

Access for free at openstax.org



1 • Chapter Review     75

rational expression the quotient of two polynomial expressions 
rational numbers  the set of all numbers of the form  where  and  are integers and  Any rational number 

may be written as a fraction or a terminating or repeating decimal. 
real number line  a horizontal line used to represent the real numbers. An arbitrary fixed point is chosen to represent 

0; positive numbers lie to the right of 0 and negative numbers to the left. 
real numbers  the sets of rational numbers and irrational numbers taken together 
scientific notation  a shorthand notation for writing very large or very small numbers in the form  where 

 and  is an integer 
term of a polynomial any  of a polynomial in the form 
trinomial  a polynomial containing three terms 
variable  a quantity that may change value 
whole numbers  the set consisting of 0 plus the natural numbers: 

Key Equations 

Rules of Exponents 
For nonzero real numbers  and  and integers  and 

Product rule 

Quotient rule 

Power rule 

Zero exponent rule 

Negative rule 

Power of a product rule 

Power of a quotient rule 

perfect square trinomial 

difference of squares 

difference of squares 

perfect square trinomial 

sum of cubes 

difference of cubes 

Key Concepts 
1.1 Real Numbers: Algebra Essentials 

• Rational numbers may be written as fractions or terminating or repeating decimals. See Example 1 and Example 2. 
• Determine whether a number is rational or irrational by writing it as a decimal. See Example 3. 
• The rational numbers and irrational numbers make up the set of real numbers. See Example 4. A number can be 

classified as natural, whole, integer, rational, or irrational. See Example 5. 



76     1 • Chapter Review

• The order of operations is used to evaluate expressions. See Example 6. 
• The real numbers under the operations of addition and multiplication obey basic rules, known as the properties of 

real numbers. These are the commutative properties, the associative properties, the distributive property, the 
identity properties, and the inverse properties. See Example 7. 

• Algebraic expressions are composed of constants and variables that are combined using addition, subtraction, 
multiplication, and division. See Example 8. They take on a numerical value when evaluated by replacing variables 
with constants. See Example 9, Example 10, and Example 12 

• Formulas are equations in which one quantity is represented in terms of other quantities. They may be simplified or 
evaluated as any mathematical expression. See Example 11 and Example 13. 

1.2 Exponents and Scientific Notation 
• Products of exponential expressions with the same base can be simplified by adding exponents. See Example 1. 
• Quotients of exponential expressions with the same base can be simplified by subtracting exponents. See Example 

2. 
• Powers of exponential expressions with the same base can be simplified by multiplying exponents. See Example 3. 
• An expression with exponent zero is defined as 1. See Example 4. 
• An expression with a negative exponent is defined as a reciprocal. See Example 5 and Example 6. 
• The power of a product of factors is the same as the product of the powers of the same factors. See Example 7. 
• The power of a quotient of factors is the same as the quotient of the powers of the same factors. See Example 8. 
• The rules for exponential expressions can be combined to simplify more complicated expressions. See Example 9. 
• Scientific notation uses powers of 10 to simplify very large or very small numbers. See Example 10 and Example 11. 
• Scientific notation may be used to simplify calculations with very large or very small numbers. See Example 12 and 

Example 13. 

1.3 Radicals and Rational Exponents 
• The principal square root of a number  is the nonnegative number that when multiplied by itself equals  See 

Example 1. 
• If  and  are nonnegative, the square root of the product  is equal to the product of the square roots of  and 

See Example 2 and Example 3. 
• If  and  are nonnegative, the square root of the quotient  is equal to the quotient of the square roots of  and 

See Example 4 and Example 5. 
• We can add and subtract radical expressions if they have the same radicand and the same index. See Example 6 and 

Example 7. 
• Radical expressions written in simplest form do not contain a radical in the denominator. To eliminate the square 

root radical from the denominator, multiply both the numerator and the denominator by the conjugate of the 
denominator. See Example 8 and Example 9. 

• The principal nth root of  is the number with the same sign as  that when raised to the nth power equals  These 
roots have the same properties as square roots. See Example 10. 

• Radicals can be rewritten as rational exponents and rational exponents can be rewritten as radicals. See Example 11 
and Example 12. 

• The properties of exponents apply to rational exponents. See Example 13. 

1.4 Polynomials 
• A polynomial is a sum of terms each consisting of a variable raised to a non-negative integer power. The degree is 

the highest power of the variable that occurs in the polynomial. The leading term is the term containing the highest 
degree, and the leading coefficient is the coefficient of that term. See Example 1. 

• We can add and subtract polynomials by combining like terms. See Example 2 and Example 3. 
• To multiply polynomials, use the distributive property to multiply each term in the first polynomial by each term in 

the second. Then add the products. See Example 4. 
• FOIL (First, Outer, Inner, Last) is a shortcut that can be used to multiply binomials. See Example 5. 
• Perfect square trinomials and difference of squares are special products. See Example 6 and Example 7. 
• Follow the same rules to work with polynomials containing several variables. See Example 8. 

1.5 Factoring Polynomials 
• The greatest common factor, or GCF, can be factored out of a polynomial. Checking for a GCF should be the first step 

in any factoring problem. See Example 1. 
• Trinomials with leading coefficient 1 can be factored by finding numbers that have a product of the third term and a 

sum of the second term. See Example 2. 

Access for free at openstax.org



1 • Exercises     77

• Trinomials can be factored using a process called factoring by grouping. See Example 3. 
• Perfect square trinomials and the difference of squares are special products and can be factored using equations. 

See Example 4 and Example 5. 
• The sum of cubes and the difference of cubes can be factored using equations. See Example 6 and Example 7. 
• Polynomials containing fractional and negative exponents can be factored by pulling out a GCF. See Example 8. 

1.6 Rational Expressions 
• Rational expressions can be simplified by cancelling common factors in the numerator and denominator. See 

Example 1. 
• We can multiply rational expressions by multiplying the numerators and multiplying the denominators. See Example 

2. 
• To divide rational expressions, multiply by the reciprocal of the second expression. See Example 3. 
• Adding or subtracting rational expressions requires finding a common denominator. See Example 4 and Example 5. 
• Complex rational expressions have fractions in the numerator or the denominator. These expressions can be 

simplified. See Example 6. 

Exercises 
Review Exercises 
Real Numbers: Algebra Essentials 
For the following exercises, perform the given operations. 

1 .  2 .  3 . 

For the following exercises, solve the equation. 

4 .  5 . 

For the following exercises, simplify the expression. 
6 .  7 . 

For the following exercises, identify the number as rational, irrational, whole, or natural. Choose the most descriptive 
answer. 

8 . 11  9 . 0  10 . 

11 . 

Exponents and Scientific Notation 

For the following exercises, simplify the expression. 

12 .  13 .  14 . 

15 .  16 .  17 . 

18 .  19 .  20 . Write the number in 
standard notation: 

21 . Write the number in 
scientific notation: 
16,340,000 

Radicals and Rational Expressions 

For the following exercises, find the principal square root. 

22 .  23 .  24 . 



78     1 • Exercises

25 .  26 .  27 . 

28 .  29 .  30 . 

31 .  32 .  33 . 

34 . 

Polynomials 

For the following exercises, perform the given operations and simplify. 

35 .  36 .  37 . 

38 .  39 .  40 . 

41 .  42 .  43 . 

44 . 

Factoring Polynomials 

For the following exercises, find the greatest common factor. 

45 .  46 .  47 . 

For the following exercises, factor the polynomial. 

48 .  49 .  50 . 

51 .  52 .  53 . 

54 .  55 .  56 . 

57 .  58 .  59 . 

60 . 

Rational Expressions 

For the following exercises, simplify the expression. 

61 .  62 .  63 . 

64 .  65 .  66 . 

67 .  68 .  69 . 

70 . 

Practice Test 
For the following exercises, identify the number as rational, irrational, whole, or natural. Choose the most descriptive 
answer. 

1 .  2 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



1 • Exercises     79

For the following exercises, evaluate the expression. 

3 .  4 .  5 . Write the number in 
standard notation: 

6 . Write the number in 
scientific notation: 
0.0000000212. 

For the following exercises, simplify the expression. 

7 .  8 .  9 . 

10 .  11 .  12 . 

13 .  14 .  15 . 

16 .  17 .  18 . 

19 .  20 . 

21 .  22 . 

For the following exercises, factor the polynomial. 

23 .  24 .  25 . 

26 . 

For the following exercises, simplify the expression. 

27 .  28 .  29 . 



80     1 • Exercises

Access for free at openstax.org



2 • Introduction to Equations and Inequalities          81

2 EQUATIONS AND INEQUALITIES 

From the air, a landscape of circular crop fields may seem random, but they are laid out and irrigated very precisely. 
Farmers and irrigation providers combining agricultural science, engineering, and mathematics to achieve the most 
productive and efficient array. (Credit: Modification of "Aerial Phot of Center Pivot Irrigations Systems (1)" by Soil Science/
flickr) 

Chapter Outline 
2.1 The Rectangular Coordinate Systems and Graphs 
2.2 Linear Equations in One Variable 
2.3 Models and Applications 
2.4 Complex Numbers 
2.5 Quadratic Equations 
2.6 Other Types of Equations 
2.7 Linear Inequalities and Absolute Value Inequalities 

Introduction to Equations and Inequalities 
Irrigation is a critical aspect of agriculture, which can expand the yield of farms and enable farming in areas not naturally 
viable for crops. But the materials, equipment, and the water itself are expensive and complex. To be efficient and 
productive, farm owners and irrigation specialists must carefully lay out the network of pipes, pumps, and related 
equipment. The available land can be divided into regular portions (similar to a grid), and the different sizes of irrigation 
systems and conduits can be installed within the plotted area. 

2.1 The Rectangular Coordinate Systems and Graphs 
Learning Objectives 
In this section, you will: 

Plot ordered pairs in a Cartesian coordinate system. 
Graph equations by plotting points. 
Graph equations with a graphing utility. 
Find x-intercepts and y-intercepts. 
Use the distance formula. 
Use the midpoint formula. 



82     2 • Equations and Inequalities

Figure 1 
Tracie set out from Elmhurst, IL, to go to Franklin Park. On the way, she made a few stops to do errands. Each stop is 
indicated by a red dot in Figure 1. Laying a rectangular coordinate grid over the map, we can see that each stop aligns 
with an intersection of grid lines. In this section, we will learn how to use grid lines to describe locations and changes in 
locations. 

Plotting Ordered Pairs in the Cartesian Coordinate System 
An old story describes how seventeenth-century philosopher/mathematician René Descartes, while sick in bed, invented 
the system that has become the foundation of algebra. According to the story, Descartes was staring at a fly crawling on 
the ceiling when he realized that he could describe the fly’s location in relation to the perpendicular lines formed by the 
adjacent walls of his room. He viewed the perpendicular lines as horizontal and vertical axes. Further, by dividing each 
axis into equal unit lengths, Descartes saw that it was possible to locate any object in a two-dimensional plane using just 
two numbers—the displacement from the horizontal axis and the displacement from the vertical axis. 
While there is evidence that ideas similar to Descartes’ grid system existed centuries earlier, it was Descartes who 
introduced the components that comprise the Cartesian coordinate system, a grid system having perpendicular axes. 
Descartes named the horizontal axis the x-axis and the vertical axis the y-axis. 
The Cartesian coordinate system, also called the rectangular coordinate system, is based on a two-dimensional plane 
consisting of the x-axis and the y-axis. Perpendicular to each other, the axes divide the plane into four sections. Each 
section is called a quadrant; the quadrants are numbered counterclockwise as shown in Figure 2 

Figure 2 
The center of the plane is the point at which the two axes cross. It is known as the origin, or point  From the origin, 
each axis is further divided into equal units: increasing, positive numbers to the right on the x-axis and up the y-axis; 
decreasing, negative numbers to the left on the x-axis and down the y-axis. The axes extend to positive and negative 
infinity as shown by the arrowheads in Figure 3. 

Access for free at openstax.org



2.1 • The Rectangular Coordinate Systems and Graphs     83

Figure 3 
Each point in the plane is identified by its x-coordinate, or horizontal displacement from the origin, and its 
y-coordinate, or vertical displacement from the origin. Together, we write them as an ordered pair indicating the 
combined distance from the origin in the form  An ordered pair is also known as a coordinate pair because it 
consists of x- and y-coordinates. For example, we can represent the point  in the plane by moving three units to 
the right of the origin in the horizontal direction, and one unit down in the vertical direction. See Figure 4. 

Figure 4 
When dividing the axes into equally spaced increments, note that the x-axis may be considered separately from the 
y-axis. In other words, while the x-axis may be divided and labeled according to consecutive integers, the y-axis may be 
divided and labeled by increments of 2, or 10, or 100. In fact, the axes may represent other units, such as years against 
the balance in a savings account, or quantity against cost, and so on. Consider the rectangular coordinate system 
primarily as a method for showing the relationship between two quantities. 

Cartesian Coordinate System 

A two-dimensional plane where the 

• x-axis is the horizontal axis 
• y-axis is the vertical axis 

A point in the plane is defined as an ordered pair,  such that x is determined by its horizontal distance from the 
origin and y is determined by its vertical distance from the origin. 

EXAMPLE 1 

Plotting Points in a Rectangular Coordinate System 
Plot the points   and  in the plane. 

Solution 
To plot the point  begin at the origin. The x-coordinate is –2, so move two units to the left. The y-coordinate is 4, 
so then move four units up in the positive y direction. 



84     2 • Equations and Inequalities

To plot the point  begin again at the origin. The x-coordinate is 3, so move three units to the right. The 
y-coordinate is also 3, so move three units up in the positive y direction. 
To plot the point  begin again at the origin. The x-coordinate is 0. This tells us not to move in either direction 
along the x-axis. The y-coordinate is –3, so move three units down in the negative y direction. See the graph in Figure 5. 

Figure 5 

Analysis 
Note that when either coordinate is zero, the point must be on an axis. If the x-coordinate is zero, the point is on the 
y-axis. If the y-coordinate is zero, the point is on the x-axis. 

Graphing Equations by Plotting Points 
We can plot a set of points to represent an equation. When such an equation contains both an x variable and a y
variable, it is called an equation in two variables. Its graph is called a graph in two variables. Any graph on a two-
dimensional plane is a graph in two variables. 
Suppose we want to graph the equation  We can begin by substituting a value for x into the equation and 
determining the resulting value of y. Each pair of x- and y-values is an ordered pair that can be plotted. Table 1 lists 
values of x from –3 to 3 and the resulting values for y. 

Table 1 

We can plot the points in the table. The points for this particular equation form a line, so we can connect them. See 
Figure 6. This is not true for all equations. 

Access for free at openstax.org



2.1 • The Rectangular Coordinate Systems and Graphs     85

Figure 6 
Note that the x-values chosen are arbitrary, regardless of the type of equation we are graphing. Of course, some 
situations may require particular values of x to be plotted in order to see a particular result. Otherwise, it is logical to 
choose values that can be calculated easily, and it is always a good idea to choose values that are both negative and 
positive. There is no rule dictating how many points to plot, although we need at least two to graph a line. Keep in mind, 
however, that the more points we plot, the more accurately we can sketch the graph. 

...
HOW TO 

Given an equation, graph by plotting points. 

1. Make a table with one column labeled x, a second column labeled with the equation, and a third column listing 
the resulting ordered pairs. 

2. Enter x-values down the first column using positive and negative values. Selecting the x-values in numerical 
order will make the graphing simpler. 

3. Select x-values that will yield y-values with little effort, preferably ones that can be calculated mentally. 
4. Plot the ordered pairs. 
5. Connect the points if they form a line. 

EXAMPLE 2 

Graphing an Equation in Two Variables by Plotting Points 
Graph the equation  by plotting points. 

Solution 
First, we construct a table similar to Table 2. Choose x values and calculate y. 

Table 2 



86     2 • Equations and Inequalities

Table 2 

Now, plot the points. Connect them if they form a line. See Figure 7 

Figure 7 

 TRY IT #1 Construct a table and graph the equation by plotting points: 

Graphing Equations with a Graphing Utility 
Most graphing calculators require similar techniques to graph an equation. The equations sometimes have to be 
manipulated so they are written in the style  The TI-84 Plus, and many other calculator makes and models, 
have a mode function, which allows the window (the screen for viewing the graph) to be altered so the pertinent parts of 
a graph can be seen. 
For example, the equation  has been entered in the TI-84 Plus shown in Figure 8a. In Figure 8b, the resulting 
graph is shown. Notice that we cannot see on the screen where the graph crosses the axes. The standard window screen 
on the TI-84 Plus shows  and  See Figure 8c. 

Figure 8 a. Enter the equation. b. This is the graph in the original window. c. These are the original settings. 
By changing the window to show more of the positive x-axis and more of the negative y-axis, we have a much better 
view of the graph and the x- and y-intercepts. See Figure 9a and Figure 9b. 

Figure 9 a. This screen shows the new window settings. b. We can clearly view the intercepts in the new window. 

Access for free at openstax.org



2.1 • The Rectangular Coordinate Systems and Graphs     87

EXAMPLE 3 

Using a Graphing Utility to Graph an Equation 
Use a graphing utility to graph the equation: 

Solution 
Enter the equation in the y= function of the calculator. Set the window settings so that both the x- and y- intercepts are 
showing in the window. See Figure 10. 

Figure 10 

Finding x-intercepts and y-intercepts 
The intercepts of a graph are points at which the graph crosses the axes. The x-intercept is the point at which the 
graph crosses the x-axis. At this point, the y-coordinate is zero. The y-intercept is the point at which the graph crosses 
the y-axis. At this point, the x-coordinate is zero. 
To determine the x-intercept, we set y equal to zero and solve for x. Similarly, to determine the y-intercept, we set x equal 
to zero and solve for y. For example, lets find the intercepts of the equation 
To find the x-intercept, set 

To find the y-intercept, set 

We can confirm that our results make sense by observing a graph of the equation as in Figure 11. Notice that the graph 
crosses the axes where we predicted it would. 



88     2 • Equations and Inequalities

Figure 11 

Given an equation, find the intercepts. 

• Find the x-intercept by setting  and solving for 
• Find the y-intercept by setting  and solving for 

EXAMPLE 4 

Finding the Intercepts of the Given Equation 
Find the intercepts of the equation  Then sketch the graph using only the intercepts. 

Solution 
Set  to find the x-intercept. 

Set  to find the y-intercept. 

Plot both points, and draw a line passing through them as in Figure 12. 

Figure 12 

 TRY IT #2 Find the intercepts of the equation and sketch the graph: 

Using the Distance Formula 
Derived from the Pythagorean Theorem, the distance formula is used to find the distance between two points in the 
plane. The Pythagorean Theorem,  is based on a right triangle where a and b are the lengths of the legs 

Access for free at openstax.org



2.1 • The Rectangular Coordinate Systems and Graphs     89

adjacent to the right angle, and c is the length of the hypotenuse. See Figure 13. 

Figure 13 
The relationship of sides  and  to side d is the same as that of sides a and b to side c. We use the 
absolute value symbol to indicate that the length is a positive number because the absolute value of any number is 
positive. (For example,  ) The symbols  and  indicate that the lengths of the sides of the 
triangle are positive. To find the length c, take the square root of both sides of the Pythagorean Theorem. 

It follows that the distance formula is given as 

We do not have to use the absolute value symbols in this definition because any number squared is positive. 

The Distance Formula 

Given endpoints  and  the distance between two points is given by 

EXAMPLE 5 

Finding the Distance between Two Points 
Find the distance between the points  and 

Solution 
Let us first look at the graph of the two points. Connect the points to form a right triangle as in Figure 14. 

Figure 14 
Then, calculate the length of d using the distance formula. 



90     2 • Equations and Inequalities

 TRY IT #3 Find the distance between two points:  and 

EXAMPLE 6 

Finding the Distance between Two Locations 
Let’s return to the situation introduced at the beginning of this section. 
Tracie set out from Elmhurst, IL, to go to Franklin Park. On the way, she made a few stops to do errands. Each stop is 
indicated by a red dot in Figure 1. Find the total distance that Tracie traveled. Compare this with the distance between 
her starting and final positions. 

Solution 
The first thing we should do is identify ordered pairs to describe each position. If we set the starting position at the 
origin, we can identify each of the other points by counting units east (right) and north (up) on the grid. For example, the 
first stop is 1 block east and 1 block north, so it is at  The next stop is 5 blocks to the east, so it is at  After 
that, she traveled 3 blocks east and 2 blocks north to  Lastly, she traveled 4 blocks north to  We can label 
these points on the grid as in Figure 15. 

Figure 15 
Next, we can calculate the distance. Note that each grid unit represents 1,000 feet. 

• From her starting location to her first stop at  Tracie might have driven north 1,000 feet and then east 1,000 
feet, or vice versa. Either way, she drove 2,000 feet to her first stop. 

• Her second stop is at  So from  to  Tracie drove east 4,000 feet. 
• Her third stop is at  There are a number of routes from  to  Whatever route Tracie decided to use, 

the distance is the same, as there are no angular streets between the two points. Let’s say she drove east 3,000 feet 
and then north 2,000 feet for a total of 5,000 feet. 

• Tracie’s final stop is at  This is a straight drive north from  for a total of 4,000 feet. 

Access for free at openstax.org



2.1 • The Rectangular Coordinate Systems and Graphs     91

Next, we will add the distances listed in Table 3. 

From/To Number of Feet Driven 

 to 2,000 

 to 4,000 

 to 5,000 

 to 4,000 

Total 15,000 

Table 3 

The total distance Tracie drove is 15,000 feet, or 2.84 miles. This is not, however, the actual distance between her starting 
and ending positions. To find this distance, we can use the distance formula between the points  and 

At 1,000 feet per grid unit, the distance between Elmhurst, IL, to Franklin Park is 10,630.14 feet, or 2.01 miles. The 
distance formula results in a shorter calculation because it is based on the hypotenuse of a right triangle, a straight 
diagonal from the origin to the point  Perhaps you have heard the saying “as the crow flies,” which means the 
shortest distance between two points because a crow can fly in a straight line even though a person on the ground has 
to travel a longer distance on existing roadways. 

Using the Midpoint Formula 
When the endpoints of a line segment are known, we can find the point midway between them. This point is known as 
the midpoint and the formula is known as the midpoint formula. Given the endpoints of a line segment,  and 

 the midpoint formula states how to find the coordinates of the midpoint 

A graphical view of a midpoint is shown in Figure 16. Notice that the line segments on either side of the midpoint are 
congruent. 

Figure 16 



92     2 • Equations and Inequalities

EXAMPLE 7 

Finding the Midpoint of the Line Segment 
Find the midpoint of the line segment with the endpoints  and 

Solution 
Use the formula to find the midpoint of the line segment. 

 TRY IT #4 Find the midpoint of the line segment with endpoints  and 

EXAMPLE 8 

Finding the Center of a Circle 
The diameter of a circle has endpoints  and  Find the center of the circle. 

Solution 
The center of a circle is the center, or midpoint, of its diameter. Thus, the midpoint formula will yield the center point. 

 MEDIA 

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with the Cartesian coordinate system. 

Plotting points on the coordinate plane (https://openstax.org/l/coordplotpnts) 
Find x and y intercepts based on the graph of a line (https://openstax.org/l/xyintsgraph) 

 2.1 SECTION EXERCISES 
Verbal 

1 . Is it possible for a point  2 . Describe the process for  3 . Describe in your own words 
plotted in the Cartesian finding the x-intercept and what the y-intercept of a 
coordinate system to not lie the y-intercept of a graph graph is. 
in one of the four algebraically. 
quadrants? Explain. 

4 . When using the distance 
formula 

explain the correct order of 
operations that are to be 
performed to obtain the 
correct answer. 

Access for free at openstax.org



2.1 • The Rectangular Coordinate Systems and Graphs     93

Algebraic 

For each of the following exercises, find the x-intercept and the y-intercept without graphing. Write the coordinates of 
each intercept. 
5 .  6 .  7 . 

8 .  9 .  10 . 

For each of the following exercises, solve the equation for y in terms of x. 
11 .  12 .  13 . 
14 .  15 .  16 . 

For each of the following exercises, find the distance between the two points. Simplify your answers, and write the exact 
answer in simplest radical form for irrational answers. 
17 .  and  18 .  and  19 .  and 
20 .  and  21 . Find the distance between 

the two points given using 
your calculator, and round 
your answer to the nearest 
hundredth. 

 and 

For each of the following exercises, find the coordinates of the midpoint of the line segment that joins the two given 
points. 
22 .  and  23 .  and  24 .  and 
25 .  and  26 .  and 

Graphical 

For each of the following exercises, identify the information requested. 
27 . What are the coordinates  28 . If a point is located on the  29 . If a point is located on the 

of the origin? y-axis, what is the x-axis, what is the 
x-coordinate? y-coordinate? 

For each of the following exercises, plot the three points on the given coordinate plane. State whether the three points 
you plotted appear to be collinear (on the same line). 
30 .  31 .  32 . 



94     2 • Equations and Inequalities

33 . Name the coordinates of the  34 . Name the quadrant in 
points graphed. which the following points 

would be located. If the 
point is on an axis, name 
the axis. 
ⓐ  ⓑ  
ⓒ  ⓓ  
ⓔ  

For each of the following exercises, construct a table and graph the equation by plotting at least three points. 

35 .  36 .  37 . 

Numeric 

For each of the following exercises, find and plot the x- and y-intercepts, and graph the straight line based on those two 
points. 
38 .  39 .  40 . 

41 .  42 . 

For each of the following exercises, use the graph in the figure below. 

43 . Find the distance between  44 . Find the coordinates of the  45 . Find the distance that 
the two endpoints using midpoint of the line  is from the origin. 
the distance formula. segment connecting the 
Round to three decimal two points. 
places. 

46 . Find the distance that  47 . Which point is closer to the 
is from the origin. Round origin? 
to three decimal places. 

Access for free at openstax.org



2.1 • The Rectangular Coordinate Systems and Graphs     95

Technology 

For the following exercises, use your graphing calculator to input the linear graphs in the Y= graph menu. 

After graphing it, use the 2nd CALC button and 1:value button, hit enter. At the lower part of the screen you will see “x=” 
and a blinking cursor. You may enter any number for x and it will display the y value for any x value you input. Use this 
and plug in x = 0, thus finding the y-intercept, for each of the following graphs. 

48 .  49 .  50 . 

For the following exercises, use your graphing calculator to input the linear graphs in the Y= graph menu. 

After graphing it, use the 2nd CALC button and 2:zero button, hit ENTER. At the lower part of the screen you will see “left 
bound?” and a blinking cursor on the graph of the line. Move this cursor to the left of the x-intercept, hit ENTER. Now it 
says “right bound?” Move the cursor to the right of the x-intercept, hit ENTER. Now it says “guess?” Move your cursor to 
the left somewhere in between the left and right bound near the x-intercept. Hit ENTER. At the bottom of your screen it 
will display the coordinates of the x-intercept or the “zero” to the y-value. Use this to find the x-intercept. 

Note: With linear/straight line functions the zero is not really a “guess,” but it is necessary to enter a “guess” so it will 
search and find the exact x-intercept between your right and left boundaries. With other types of functions (more than 
one x-intercept), they may be irrational numbers so “guess” is more appropriate to give it the correct limits to find a very 
close approximation between the left and right boundaries. 

51 .  52 .  53 .  Round your 
answer to the nearest 
thousandth. 

Extensions 

54 . Someone drove 10 mi  55 . If the road was made in the  56 . Given these four points: 
directly east from their previous exercise, how , , , 
home, made a left turn at much shorter would the and  find the 
an intersection, and then person’s one-way trip be coordinates of the 
traveled 5 mi north to their every day? midpoint of line segments 
place of work. If a road was  and 
made directly from the 
home to the place of work, 
what would its distance be 
to the nearest tenth of a 
mile? 

57 . After finding the two  58 . Given the graph of the rectangle 59 . In the previous exercise, 
midpoints in the previous shown and the coordinates of its find the coordinates of the 
exercise, find the distance vertices, prove that the diagonals of midpoint for each 
between the two midpoints the rectangle are of equal length. diagonal. 
to the nearest thousandth. 



96     2 • Equations and Inequalities

Real-World Applications 

60 . The coordinates on a map  61 . If San Jose’s coordinates  62 . A small craft in Lake 
for San Francisco are are , where the Ontario sends out a 

 and those for coordinates represent distress signal. The 
Sacramento are . miles, find the distance coordinates of the boat in 
Note that coordinates between San Jose and San trouble were  One 
represent miles. Find the Francisco to the nearest rescue boat is at the 
distance between the cities mile. coordinates  and a 
to the nearest mile. second Coast Guard craft is 

at coordinates . 
Assuming both rescue craft 
travel at the same rate, 
which one would get to the 
distressed boat the fastest? 

63 . A person on the top of a  64 . If we rent a truck and pay a 
building wants to have a $75/day fee plus $.20 for 
guy wire extend to a point every mile we travel, write 
on the ground 20 ft from a linear equation that 
the building. To the nearest would express the total 
foot, how long will the wire cost per day  using  to 
have to be if the building is represent the number of 
50 ft tall? miles we travel. Graph this 

function on your graphing 
calculator and find the 
total cost for one day if we 
travel 70 mi. 

2.2 Linear Equations in One Variable 
Learning Objectives 
In this section, you will: 

Solve equations in one variable algebraically. 
Solve a rational equation. 
Find a linear equation. 
Given the equations of two lines, determine whether their graphs are parallel or perpendicular. 
Write the equation of a line parallel or perpendicular to a given line. 

Caroline is a full-time college student planning a spring break vacation. To earn enough money for the trip, she has 
taken a part-time job at the local bank that pays $15.00/hr, and she opened a savings account with an initial deposit of 
$400 on January 15. She arranged for direct deposit of her payroll checks. If spring break begins March 20 and the trip 
will cost approximately $2,500, how many hours will she have to work to earn enough to pay for her vacation? If she can 
only work 4 hours per day, how many days per week will she have to work? How many weeks will it take? In this section, 
we will investigate problems like this and others, which generate graphs like the line in Figure 1. 

Access for free at openstax.org



2.2 • Linear Equations in One Variable     97

Figure 1 

Solving Linear Equations in One Variable 
A linear equation is an equation of a straight line, written in one variable. The only power of the variable is 1. Linear 
equations in one variable may take the form  and are solved using basic algebraic operations. 
We begin by classifying linear equations in one variable as one of three types: identity, conditional, or inconsistent. An 
identity equation is true for all values of the variable. Here is an example of an identity equation. 

The solution set consists of all values that make the equation true. For this equation, the solution set is all real numbers 
because any real number substituted for  will make the equation true. 
A conditional equation is true for only some values of the variable. For example, if we are to solve the equation 

 we have the following: 

The solution set consists of one number:  It is the only solution and, therefore, we have solved a conditional 
equation. 
An inconsistent equation results in a false statement. For example, if we are to solve  we have the 
following: 

Indeed,  There is no solution because this is an inconsistent equation. 
Solving linear equations in one variable involves the fundamental properties of equality and basic algebraic operations. 
A brief review of those operations follows. 

Linear Equation in One Variable 

A linear equation in one variable can be written in the form 

where a and b are real numbers, 

...
HOW TO 

Given a linear equation in one variable, use algebra to solve it. 

The following steps are used to manipulate an equation and isolate the unknown variable, so that the last line reads 
 if x is the unknown. There is no set order, as the steps used depend on what is given: 



98     2 • Equations and Inequalities

1. We may add, subtract, multiply, or divide an equation by a number or an expression as long as we do the same 
thing to both sides of the equal sign. Note that we cannot divide by zero. 

2. Apply the distributive property as needed: 
3. Isolate the variable on one side of the equation. 
4. When the variable is multiplied by a coefficient in the final stage, multiply both sides of the equation by the 

reciprocal of the coefficient. 

EXAMPLE 1 

Solving an Equation in One Variable 
Solve the following equation: 

Solution 
This equation can be written in the form  by subtracting  from both sides. However, we may proceed to 
solve the equation in its original form by performing algebraic operations. 

The solution is 6. 

 TRY IT #1 Solve the linear equation in one variable: 

EXAMPLE 2 

Solving an Equation Algebraically When the Variable Appears on Both Sides 
Solve the following equation: 

Solution 
Apply standard algebraic properties. 

Analysis 
This problem requires the distributive property to be applied twice, and then the properties of algebra are used to reach 
the final line, 

 TRY IT #2 Solve the equation in one variable: 

Solving a Rational Equation 
In this section, we look at rational equations that, after some manipulation, result in a linear equation. If an equation 
contains at least one rational expression, it is a considered a rational equation. 

Recall that a rational number is the ratio of two numbers, such as  or  A rational expression is the ratio, or quotient, 
of two polynomials. Here are three examples. 

Access for free at openstax.org



2.2 • Linear Equations in One Variable     99

Rational equations have a variable in the denominator in at least one of the terms. Our goal is to perform algebraic 
operations so that the variables appear in the numerator. In fact, we will eliminate all denominators by multiplying both 
sides of the equation by the least common denominator (LCD). 
Finding the LCD is identifying an expression that contains the highest power of all of the factors in all of the 
denominators. We do this because when the equation is multiplied by the LCD, the common factors in the LCD and in 
each denominator will equal one and will cancel out. 

EXAMPLE 3 

Solving a Rational Equation 
Solve the rational equation: 

Solution 
We have three denominators;  and 3. The LCD must contain  and 3. An LCD of  contains all three 
denominators. In other words, each denominator can be divided evenly into the LCD. Next, multiply both sides of the 
equation by the LCD 

A common mistake made when solving rational equations involves finding the LCD when one of the denominators is a 
binomial—two terms added or subtracted—such as  Always consider a binomial as an individual factor—the 
terms cannot be separated. For example, suppose a problem has three terms and the denominators are   and 

 First, factor all denominators. We then have   and  as the denominators. (Note the parentheses 
placed around the second denominator.) Only the last two denominators have a common factor of  The  in the 
first denominator is separate from the  in the  denominators. An effective way to remember this is to write 
factored and binomial denominators in parentheses, and consider each parentheses as a separate unit or a separate 
factor. The LCD in this instance is found by multiplying together the  one factor of  and the 3. Thus, the LCD is 
the following: 

So, both sides of the equation would be multiplied by  Leave the LCD in factored form, as this makes it easier 
to see how each denominator in the problem cancels out. 

Another example is a problem with two denominators, such as  and  Once the second denominator is factored 
as  there is a common factor of x in both denominators and the LCD is 
Sometimes we have a rational equation in the form of a proportion; that is, when one fraction equals another fraction 
and there are no other terms in the equation. 

We can use another method of solving the equation without finding the LCD: cross-multiplication. We multiply terms by 
crossing over the equal sign. 



100     2 • Equations and Inequalities

Multiply  and  which results in 
Any solution that makes a denominator in the original expression equal zero must be excluded from the possibilities. 

Rational Equations 

A rational equation contains at least one rational expression where the variable appears in at least one of the 
denominators. 

...
HOW TO 

Given a rational equation, solve it. 

1. Factor all denominators in the equation. 
2. Find and exclude values that set each denominator equal to zero. 
3. Find the LCD. 
4. Multiply the whole equation by the LCD. If the LCD is correct, there will be no denominators left. 
5. Solve the remaining equation. 
6. Make sure to check solutions back in the original equations to avoid a solution producing zero in a denominator. 

EXAMPLE 4 

Solving a Rational Equation without Factoring 
Solve the following rational equation: 

Solution 
We have three denominators:   and  No factoring is required. The product of the first two denominators is equal 
to the third denominator, so, the LCD is  Only one value is excluded from a solution set, 0.  Next, multiply the whole 
equation (both sides of the equal sign) by 

The proposed solution is −1,  which is not an excluded value, so the solution set contains one number,  or 
written in set notation. 

 TRY IT #3 Solve the rational equation: 

EXAMPLE 5 

Solving a Rational Equation by Factoring the Denominator 
Solve the following rational equation: 

Access for free at openstax.org



2.2 • Linear Equations in One Variable     101

Solution 
First find the common denominator. The three denominators in factored form are  and  The 
smallest expression that is divisible by each one of the denominators is  Only  is an excluded value. Multiply 
the whole equation by 

The solution is 

 TRY IT #4 Solve the rational equation: 

EXAMPLE 6 

Solving Rational Equations with a Binomial in the Denominator 
Solve the following rational equations and state the excluded values: 

ⓐ   ⓑ   ⓒ  
Solution 

ⓐ 
The denominators  and  have nothing in common. Therefore, the LCD is the product  However, for 
this problem, we can cross-multiply. 

The solution is 15.  The excluded values are  and 

ⓑ 
The LCD is  Multiply both sides of the equation by 

The solution is  The excluded value is 



102     2 • Equations and Inequalities

ⓒ 
The least common denominator is  Multiply both sides of the equation by 

The solution is 4. The excluded value is 

 TRY IT #5 Solve  State the excluded values. 

EXAMPLE 7 

Solving a Rational Equation with Factored Denominators and Stating Excluded Values 
Solve the rational equation after factoring the denominators:  State the excluded values. 

Solution 
We must factor the denominator  We recognize this as the difference of squares, and factor it as 
Thus, the LCD that contains each denominator is  Multiply the whole equation by the LCD, cancel out the 
denominators, and solve the remaining equation. 

The solution is  The excluded values are  and 

 TRY IT #6 Solve the rational equation: 

Finding a Linear Equation 
Perhaps the most familiar form of a linear equation is the slope-intercept form, written as  where 
and  Let us begin with the slope. 

The Slope of a Line 
The slope of a line refers to the ratio of the vertical change in y over the horizontal change in x between any two points 
on a line. It indicates the direction in which a line slants as well as its steepness. Slope is sometimes described as rise 
over run. 

If the slope is positive, the line slants upward to the right. If the slope is negative, the line slants downward to the right. 
As the absolute value of the slope increases, the line becomes steeper. Some examples are shown in Figure 2. The lines 
indicate the following slopes:   and 

Access for free at openstax.org



2.2 • Linear Equations in One Variable     103

Figure 2 

The Slope of a Line 

The slope of a line, m, represents the change in y over the change in x. Given two points,  and  the 
following formula determines the slope of a line containing these points: 

EXAMPLE 8 

Finding the Slope of a Line Given Two Points 
Find the slope of a line that passes through the points  and 

Solution 
We substitute the y-values and the x-values into the formula. 

The slope is 

Analysis 

It does not matter which point is called  or  As long as we are consistent with the order of the y terms 
and the order of the x terms in the numerator and denominator, the calculation will yield the same result. 

 TRY IT #7 Find the slope of the line that passes through the points  and 

EXAMPLE 9 

Identifying the Slope and y-intercept of a Line Given an Equation 
Identify the slope and y-intercept, given the equation 



104     2 • Equations and Inequalities

Solution 
As the line is in  form, the given line has a slope of  The y-intercept is 

Analysis 
The y-intercept is the point at which the line crosses the y-axis. On the y-axis,  We can always identify the 
y-intercept when the line is in slope-intercept form, as it will always equal b. Or, just substitute  and solve for y. 

The Point-Slope Formula 
Given the slope and one point on a line, we can find the equation of the line using the point-slope formula. 

This is an important formula, as it will be used in other areas of college algebra and often in calculus to find the equation 
of a tangent line. We need only one point and the slope of the line to use the formula. After substituting the slope and 
the coordinates of one point into the formula, we simplify it and write it in slope-intercept form. 

The Point-Slope Formula 

Given one point and the slope, the point-slope formula will lead to the equation of a line: 

EXAMPLE 10 

Finding the Equation of a Line Given the Slope and One Point 
Write the equation of the line with slope  and passing through the point  Write the final equation in slope-
intercept form. 

Solution 
Using the point-slope formula, substitute  for m and the point  for 

Analysis 
Note that any point on the line can be used to find the equation. If done correctly, the same final equation will be 
obtained. 

 TRY IT #8 Given  find the equation of the line in slope-intercept form passing through the point 

EXAMPLE 11 

Finding the Equation of a Line Passing Through Two Given Points 
Find the equation of the line passing through the points  and  Write the final equation in slope-intercept 
form. 

Solution 
First, we calculate the slope using the slope formula and two points. 

Access for free at openstax.org



2.2 • Linear Equations in One Variable     105

Next, we use the point-slope formula with the slope of  and either point. Let’s pick the point  for 

In slope-intercept form, the equation is written as 

Analysis 
To prove that either point can be used, let us use the second point  and see if we get the same equation. 

We see that the same line will be obtained using either point. This makes sense because we used both points to calculate 
the slope. 

Standard Form of a Line 
Another way that we can represent the equation of a line is in standard form. Standard form is given as 

where   and  are integers. The x- and y-terms are on one side of the equal sign and the constant term is on the 
other side. 

EXAMPLE 12 

Finding the Equation of a Line and Writing It in Standard Form 
Find the equation of the line with  and passing through the point  Write the equation in standard form. 

Solution 
We begin using the point-slope formula. 

From here, we multiply through by 2, as no fractions are permitted in standard form, and then move both variables to 
the left aside of the equal sign and move the constants to the right. 

This equation is now written in standard form. 

 TRY IT #9 Find the equation of the line in standard form with slope  and passing through the point 

Vertical and Horizontal Lines 
The equations of vertical and horizontal lines do not require any of the preceding formulas, although we can use the 
formulas to prove that the equations are correct. The equation of a vertical line is given as 

where c is a constant. The slope of a vertical line is undefined, and regardless of the y-value of any point on the line, the 
x-coordinate of the point will be c. 



106     2 • Equations and Inequalities

Suppose that we want to find the equation of a line containing the following points:  and 
 First, we will find the slope. 

Zero in the denominator means that the slope is undefined and, therefore, we cannot use the point-slope formula. 
However, we can plot the points. Notice that all of the x-coordinates are the same and we find a vertical line through 

 See Figure 3. 
The equation of a horizontal line is given as 

where c is a constant. The slope of a horizontal line is zero, and for any x-value of a point on the line, the y-coordinate will 
be c. 
Suppose we want to find the equation of a line that contains the following set of points:  and 

 We can use the point-slope formula. First, we find the slope using any two points on the line. 

Use any point for  in the formula, or use the y-intercept. 

The graph is a horizontal line through  Notice that all of the y-coordinates are the same. See Figure 3. 

Figure 3 The line x = −3 is a vertical line. The line y = −2 is a horizontal line. 

EXAMPLE 13 

Finding the Equation of a Line Passing Through the Given Points 
Find the equation of the line passing through the given points:  and 

Solution 
The x-coordinate of both points is 1. Therefore, we have a vertical line, 

 TRY IT #10 Find the equation of the line passing through  and 

Determining Whether Graphs of Lines are Parallel or Perpendicular 
Parallel lines have the same slope and different y-intercepts. Lines that are parallel to each other will never intersect. For 
example, Figure 4 shows the graphs of various lines with the same slope, 

Access for free at openstax.org



2.2 • Linear Equations in One Variable     107

Figure 4 Parallel lines 
All of the lines shown in the graph are parallel because they have the same slope and different y-intercepts. 
Lines that are perpendicular intersect to form a  -angle. The slope of one line is the negative reciprocal of the other. 
We can show that two lines are perpendicular if the product of the two slopes is  For example, Figure 
5 shows the graph of two perpendicular lines. One line has a slope of 3; the other line has a slope of 

Figure 5 Perpendicular lines 

EXAMPLE 14 

Graphing Two Equations, and Determining Whether the Lines are Parallel, Perpendicular, or Neither 
Graph the equations of the given lines, and state whether they are parallel, perpendicular, or neither:  and 

Solution 
The first thing we want to do is rewrite the equations so that both equations are in slope-intercept form. 
First equation: 



108     2 • Equations and Inequalities

Second equation: 

See the graph of both lines in Figure 6 

Figure 6 
From the graph, we can see that the lines appear perpendicular, but we must compare the slopes. 

The slopes are negative reciprocals of each other, confirming that the lines are perpendicular. 

 TRY IT #11 Graph the two lines and determine whether they are parallel, perpendicular, or neither: 
 and 

Writing the Equations of Lines Parallel or Perpendicular to a Given Line 
As we have learned, determining whether two lines are parallel or perpendicular is a matter of finding the slopes. To 
write the equation of a line parallel or perpendicular to another line, we follow the same principles as we do for finding 
the equation of any line. After finding the slope, use the point-slope formula to write the equation of the new line. 

...
HOW TO 

Given an equation for a line, write the equation of a line parallel or perpendicular to it. 

1. Find the slope of the given line. The easiest way to do this is to write the equation in slope-intercept form. 
2. Use the slope and the given point with the point-slope formula. 
3. Simplify the line to slope-intercept form and compare the equation to the given line. 

EXAMPLE 15 

Writing the Equation of a Line Parallel to a Given Line Passing Through a Given Point 
Write the equation of line parallel to a  and passing through the point 

Access for free at openstax.org



2.2 • Linear Equations in One Variable     109

Solution 
First, we will write the equation in slope-intercept form to find the slope. 

The slope is  The y-intercept is  but that really does not enter into our problem, as the only thing we need for 
two lines to be parallel is the same slope. The one exception is that if the y-intercepts are the same, then the two lines 
are the same line. The next step is to use this slope and the given point with the point-slope formula. 

The equation of the line is  See Figure 7. 

Figure 7 

 TRY IT #12 Find the equation of the line parallel to  and passing through the point 

EXAMPLE 16 

Finding the Equation of a Line Perpendicular to a Given Line Passing Through a Given Point 
Find the equation of the line perpendicular to  and passing through the point 

Solution 
The first step is to write the equation in slope-intercept form. 

We see that the slope is  This means that the slope of the line perpendicular to the given line is the negative 
reciprocal, or  Next, we use the point-slope formula with this new slope and the given point. 



110     2 • Equations and Inequalities

 MEDIA 

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with linear equations. 

Solving rational equations (https://openstax.org/l/rationaleqs) 
Equation of a line given two points (https://openstax.org/l/twopointsline) 
Finding the equation of a line perpendicular to another line through a given point (https://openstax.org/l/
findperpline) 
Finding the equation of a line parallel to another line through a given point (https://openstax.org/l/findparaline) 

 2.2 SECTION EXERCISES 
Verbal 

1 . What does it mean when we  2 . What is the relationship  3 . How do we recognize when 
say that two lines are between the slopes of an equation, for example 
parallel? perpendicular lines  will be a straight 

(assuming neither is line (linear) when graphed? 
horizontal nor vertical)? 

4 . What does it mean when we  5 . When solving the following 
say that a linear equation is equation: 
inconsistent? 

explain why we must 
exclude  and 
as possible solutions from 
the solution set. 

Algebraic 

For the following exercises, solve the equation for 
6 .  7 .  8 . 

9 .  10 .  11 . 

12 .  13 .  14 . 

15 . 

For the following exercises, solve each rational equation for  State all x-values that are excluded from the solution set. 

16 .  17 .  18 . 

19 .  20 .  21 . 

For the following exercises, find the equation of the line using the point-slope formula. Write all the final equations using 
the slope-intercept form. 

22 .  with a slope of  23 .  with a slope of  24 . x-intercept is 1, and 

25 . y-intercept is 2, and  26 .  and  27 . 
28 . parallel to  and  29 . perpendicular to 

passes through the point  and passes 
through the point  . 

Access for free at openstax.org



2.2 • Linear Equations in One Variable     111

For the following exercises, find the equation of the line using the given information. 
30 .  and  31 .  and  32 . The slope is undefined and 

it passes through the point 

33 . The slope equals zero and  34 . The slope is  35 .  and 
it passes through the point and it passes through the point 

. 

Graphical 

For the following exercises, graph the pair of equations on the same axes, and state whether they are parallel, 
perpendicular, or neither. 

36 .  37 .  38 . 

39 . 

Numeric 

For the following exercises, find the slope of the line that passes through the given points. 
40 .  and  41 .  and  42 .  and 
43 .  and  44 .  and 

For the following exercises, find the slope of the lines that pass through each pair of points and determine whether the 
lines are parallel or perpendicular. 

45 .  46 . 

Technology 

For the following exercises, express the equations in slope intercept form (rounding each number to the thousandths 
place). Enter this into a graphing calculator as Y1, then adjust the ymin and ymax values for your window to include 
where the y-intercept occurs. State your ymin and ymax values. 

47 .  48 .  49 . 

Extensions 

50 . Starting with the point-  51 . Starting with the standard  52 . Use the above derived 
slope formula form of an equation formula to put the 

 solve  solve this following standard 
this expression for  in expression for  in terms of equation in slope intercept 
terms of  and .  and . Then put form: 

the expression in slope-
intercept form. 



112     2 • Equations and Inequalities

53 . Given that the following  54 . Find the slopes of the 
coordinates are the diagonals in the previous 
vertices of a rectangle, exercise. Are they 
prove that this truly is a perpendicular? 
rectangle by showing the 
slopes of the sides that 
meet are perpendicular. 

 and 

Real-World Applications 

55 . The slope for a wheelchair ramp for a home has to  56 . If the profit equation for a small business selling 
be  If the vertical distance from the ground to number of item one and  number of item two is 
the door bottom is 2.5 ft, find the distance the  find the  value when 
ramp has to extend from the home in order to 
comply with the needed slope. 

For the following exercises, use this scenario: The cost of renting a car is $45/wk plus $0.25/mi traveled during that week. 
An equation to represent the cost would be  where  is the number of miles traveled. 
57 . What is your cost if you  58 . If your cost were  59 . Suppose you have a 

travel 50 mi? how many miles were you maximum of $100 to spend 
charged for traveling? for the car rental. What 

would be the maximum 
number of miles you could 
travel? 

2.3 Models and Applications 
Learning Objectives 
In this section, you will: 

Set up a linear equation to solve a real-world application. 
Use a formula to solve a real-world application. 

Figure 1 Credit: Kevin Dooley 
Neka is hoping to get an A in his college algebra class. He has scores of 75, 82, 95, 91, and 94 on his first five tests. Only 
the final exam remains, and the maximum number of points that can be earned is 100. Is it possible for Neka to end the 
course with an A? A simple linear equation will give Neka his answer. 
Many real-world applications can be modeled by linear equations. For example, a cell phone package may include a 
monthly service fee plus a charge per minute of talk-time; it costs a widget manufacturer a certain amount to produce x
widgets per month plus monthly operating charges; a car rental company charges a daily fee plus an amount per mile 
driven. These are examples of applications we come across every day that are modeled by linear equations. In this 

Access for free at openstax.org



2.3 • Models and Applications     113

section, we will set up and use linear equations to solve such problems. 

Setting up a Linear Equation to Solve a Real-World Application 
To set up or model a linear equation to fit a real-world application, we must first determine the known quantities and 
define the unknown quantity as a variable. Then, we begin to interpret the words as mathematical expressions using 
mathematical symbols. Let us use the car rental example above. In this case, a known cost, such as $0.10/mi, is 
multiplied by an unknown quantity, the number of miles driven. Therefore, we can write  This expression 
represents a variable cost because it changes according to the number of miles driven. 
If a quantity is independent of a variable, we usually just add or subtract it, according to the problem. As these amounts 
do not change, we call them fixed costs. Consider a car rental agency that charges $0.10/mi plus a daily fee of $50. We 
can use these quantities to model an equation that can be used to find the daily car rental cost 

When dealing with real-world applications, there are certain expressions that we can translate directly into math. Table 1 
lists some common verbal expressions and their equivalent mathematical expressions. 

Verbal Translation to Math Operations 

One number exceeds another by a 

Twice a number 

One number is a more than another number 

One number is a less than twice another number 

The product of a number and a, decreased by b 

The quotient of a number and the number plus a is three times the number 

The product of three times a number and the number decreased by b is c 

Table 1 

...
HOW TO 

Given a real-world problem, model a linear equation to fit it. 

1. Identify known quantities. 
2. Assign a variable to represent the unknown quantity. 
3. If there is more than one unknown quantity, find a way to write the second unknown in terms of the first. 
4. Write an equation interpreting the words as mathematical operations. 
5. Solve the equation. Be sure the solution can be explained in words, including the units of measure. 

EXAMPLE 1 

Modeling a Linear Equation to Solve an Unknown Number Problem 
Find a linear equation to solve for the following unknown quantities: One number exceeds another number by  and 
their sum is  Find the two numbers. 

Solution 
Let  equal the first number. Then, as the second number exceeds the first by 17, we can write the second number as 

 The sum of the two numbers is 31. We usually interpret the word is as an equal sign. 



114     2 • Equations and Inequalities

The two numbers are  and 

 TRY IT #1 Find a linear equation to solve for the following unknown quantities: One number is three more 
than twice another number. If the sum of the two numbers is  find the numbers. 

EXAMPLE 2 

Setting Up a Linear Equation to Solve a Real-World Application 
There are two cell phone companies that offer different packages. Company A charges a monthly service fee of $34 plus 
$.05/min talk-time. Company B charges a monthly service fee of $40 plus $.04/min talk-time. 

ⓐ Write a linear equation that models the packages offered by both companies. 
ⓑ  If the average number of minutes used each month is 1,160, which company offers the better plan? 
ⓒ If the average number of minutes used each month is 420, which company offers the better plan? 
ⓓ How many minutes of talk-time would yield equal monthly statements from both companies? 

Solution 
ⓐ The model for Company A can be written as  This includes the variable cost of  plus the 
monthly service charge of $34. Company B’s package charges a higher monthly fee of $40, but a lower variable cost of 

 Company B’s model can be written as 
ⓑ 
If the average number of minutes used each month is 1,160, we have the following: 

So, Company B offers the lower monthly cost of $86.40 as compared with the $92 monthly cost offered by Company A 
when the average number of minutes used each month is 1,160. 

ⓒ 
If the average number of minutes used each month is 420, we have the following: 

If the average number of minutes used each month is 420, then Company A offers a lower monthly cost of $55 
compared to Company B’s monthly cost of $56.80. 

Access for free at openstax.org



2.3 • Models and Applications     115

ⓓ 
To answer the question of how many talk-time minutes would yield the same bill from both companies, we should 
think about the problem in terms of  coordinates: At what point are both the x-value and the y-value equal? We 
can find this point by setting the equations equal to each other and solving for x. 

Check the x-value in each equation. 

Therefore, a monthly average of 600 talk-time minutes renders the plans equal. See Figure 2 

Figure 2 

 TRY IT #2 Find a linear equation to model this real-world application: It costs ABC electronics company $2.50 
per unit to produce a part used in a popular brand of desktop computers. The company has 
monthly operating expenses of $350 for utilities and $3,300 for salaries. What are the company’s 
monthly expenses? 

Using a Formula to Solve a Real-World Application 
Many applications are solved using known formulas. The problem is stated, a formula is identified, the known quantities 
are substituted into the formula, the equation is solved for the unknown, and the problem’s question is answered. 
Typically, these problems involve two equations representing two trips, two investments, two areas, and so on. Examples 
of formulas include the area of a rectangular region,  the perimeter of a rectangle,  and the 
volume of a rectangular solid,  When there are two unknowns, we find a way to write one in terms of the 
other because we can solve for only one variable at a time. 

EXAMPLE 3 

Solving an Application Using a Formula 
It takes Andrew 30 min to drive to work in the morning. He drives home using the same route, but it takes 10 min longer, 
and he averages 10 mi/h less than in the morning. How far does Andrew drive to work? 

Solution 
This is a distance problem, so we can use the formula  where distance equals rate multiplied by time. Note that 
when rate is given in mi/h, time must be expressed in hours. Consistent units of measurement are key to obtaining a 
correct solution. 

First, we identify the known and unknown quantities. Andrew’s morning drive to work takes 30 min, or  h at rate  His 
drive home takes 40 min, or  h, and his speed averages 10 mi/h less than the morning drive. Both trips cover distance 



116     2 • Equations and Inequalities

 A table, such as Table 2, is often helpful for keeping track of information in these types of problems. 

To Work 

To Home 

Table 2 

Write two equations, one for each trip. 

As both equations equal the same distance, we set them equal to each other and solve for r. 

We have solved for the rate of speed to work, 40 mph. Substituting 40 into the rate on the return trip yields 30 mi/h. Now 
we can answer the question. Substitute the rate back into either equation and solve for d. 

The distance between home and work is 20 mi. 

Analysis 
Note that we could have cleared the fractions in the equation by multiplying both sides of the equation by the LCD to 
solve for 

 TRY IT #3 On Saturday morning, it took Jennifer 3.6 h to drive to her mother’s house for the weekend. On 
Sunday evening, due to heavy traffic, it took Jennifer 4 h to return home. Her speed was 5 mi/h 
slower on Sunday than on Saturday. What was her speed on Sunday? 

EXAMPLE 4 

Solving a Perimeter Problem 
The perimeter of a rectangular outdoor patio is  ft. The length is  ft greater than the width. What are the dimensions 
of the patio? 

Access for free at openstax.org



2.3 • Models and Applications     117

Solution 
The perimeter formula is standard:  We have two unknown quantities, length and width. However, we can 
write the length in terms of the width as  Substitute the perimeter value and the expression for length into 
the formula. It is often helpful to make a sketch and label the sides as in Figure 3. 

Figure 3 
Now we can solve for the width and then calculate the length. 

The dimensions are  ft and  ft. 

 TRY IT #4 Find the dimensions of a rectangle given that the perimeter is  cm and the length is 1 cm more 
than twice the width. 

EXAMPLE 5 

Solving an Area Problem 
The perimeter of a tablet of graph paper is 48 in. The length is  in. more than the width. Find the area of the graph 
paper. 

Solution 
The standard formula for area is  however, we will solve the problem using the perimeter formula. The reason 
we use the perimeter formula is because we know enough information about the perimeter that the formula will allow 
us to solve for one of the unknowns. As both perimeter and area use length and width as dimensions, they are often 
used together to solve a problem such as this one. 
We know that the length is 6 in. more than the width, so we can write length as  Substitute the value of the 
perimeter and the expression for length into the perimeter formula and find the length. 

Now, we find the area given the dimensions of  in. and  in. 



118     2 • Equations and Inequalities

The area is  in.2. 

 TRY IT #5 A game room has a perimeter of 70 ft. The length is five more than twice the width. How many ft2 

of new carpeting should be ordered? 

EXAMPLE 6 

Solving a Volume Problem 
Find the dimensions of a shipping box given that the length is twice the width, the height is  inches, and the volume is 
1,600 in.3. 

Solution 
The formula for the volume of a box is given as  the product of length, width, and height. We are given that 

 and  The volume is  cubic inches. 

The dimensions are  in.,  in., and  in. 

Analysis 
Note that the square root of  would result in a positive and a negative value. However, because we are describing 
width, we can use only the positive result. 

 MEDIA 

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with models and applications of linear 
equations. 

Problem solving using linear equations (https://openstax.org/l/lineqprobsolve) 
Problem solving using equations (https://openstax.org/l/equationprsolve) 
Finding the dimensions of area given the perimeter (https://openstax.org/l/permareasolve) 
Find the distance between the cities using the distance = rate * time formula (https://openstax.org/l/ratetimesolve) 
Linear equation application (Write a cost equation) (https://openstax.org/l/lineqappl) 

 2.3 SECTION EXERCISES 
Verbal 

1 . To set up a model linear  2 . Use your own words to  3 . If the total amount of 
equation to fit real-world describe this equation money you had to invest 
applications, what should where n is a number: was $2,000 and you deposit 
always be the first step?  amount in one 

investment, how can you 
represent the remaining 
amount? 

Access for free at openstax.org



2.3 • Models and Applications     119

4 . If a carpenter sawed a 10-ft  5 . If Bill was traveling  mi/h, 
board into two sections and how would you represent 
one section was  ft long, Daemon’s speed if he was 
how long would the other traveling 10 mi/h faster? 
section be in terms of  ? 

Real-World Applications 

For the following exercises, use the information to find a linear algebraic equation model to use to answer the question 
being asked. 
6 . Mark and Don are planning  7 . Beth and Ann are joking that  8 . Ruden originally filled out 8 

to sell each of their marble their combined ages equal more applications than 
collections at a garage sale. Sam’s age. If Beth is twice Hanh. Then each boy filled 
If Don has 1 more than 3 Ann’s age and Sam is 69 yr out 3 additional 
times the number of old, what are Beth and Ann’s applications, bringing the 
marbles Mark has, how ages? total to 28. How many 
many does each boy have to applications did each boy 
sell if the total number of originally fill out? 
marbles is 113? 

For the following exercises, use this scenario: Two different telephone carriers offer the following plans that a person is 
considering. Company A has a monthly fee of $20 and charges of $.05/min for calls. Company B has a monthly fee of $5 
and charges $.10/min for calls. 
9 . Find the model of the total  10 . Find the model of the total  11 . Find out how many 

cost of Company A’s plan, cost of Company B’s plan, minutes of calling would 
using  for the minutes. using  for the minutes. make the two plans equal. 

12 . If the person makes a 
monthly average of 200 
min of calls, which plan 
should for the person 
choose? 

For the following exercises, use this scenario: A wireless carrier offers the following plans that a person is considering. 
The Family Plan: $90 monthly fee, unlimited talk and text on up to 8 lines, and data charges of $40 for each device for up 
to 2 GB of data per device. The Mobile Share Plan: $120 monthly fee for up to 10 devices, unlimited talk and text for all 
the lines, and data charges of $35 for each device up to a shared total of 10 GB of data. Use  for the number of devices 
that need data plans as part of their cost. 
13 . Find the model of the total  14 . Find the model of the total  15 . Assuming they stay under 

cost of the Family Plan. cost of the Mobile Share their data limit, find the 
Plan. number of devices that 

would make the two plans 
equal in cost. 

16 . If a family has 3 smart 
phones, which plan should 
they choose? 



120     2 • Equations and Inequalities

For exercises 17 and 18, use this scenario: A retired woman has $50,000 to invest but needs to make $6,000 a year from 
the interest to meet certain living expenses. One bond investment pays 15% annual interest. The rest of it she wants to 
put in a CD that pays 7%. 
17 . If we let  be the amount  18 . Set up and solve the  19 . Two planes fly in opposite 

the woman invests in the equation for how much the directions. One travels 450 
15% bond, how much will woman should invest in mi/h and the other 550 mi/
she be able to invest in the each option to sustain a h. How long will it take 
CD? $6,000 annual return. before they are 4,000 mi 

apart? 
20 . Ben starts walking along a  21 . Fiora starts riding her bike  22 . A chemistry teacher needs 

path at 4 mi/h. One and a at 20 mi/h. After a while, to mix a 30% salt solution 
half hours after Ben leaves, she slows down to 12 mi/h, with a 70% salt solution to 
his sister Amanda begins and maintains that speed make 20 qt of a 40% salt 
jogging along the same for the rest of the trip. The solution. How many quarts 
path at 6 mi/h. How long whole trip of 70 mi takes of each solution should the 
will it be before Amanda her 4.5 h. For what teacher mix to get the 
catches up to Ben? distance did she travel at desired result? 

20 mi/h? 
23 . Raúl has $20,000 to invest. 

His intent is to earn 11% 
interest on his investment. 
He can invest part of his 
money at 8% interest and 
part at 12% interest. How 
much does Raúl need to 
invest in each option to 
make get a total 11% 
return on his $20,000? 

For the following exercises, use this scenario: A truck rental agency offers two kinds of plans. Plan A charges $75/wk plus 
$.10/mi driven. Plan B charges $100/wk plus $.05/mi driven. 
24 . Write the model equation  25 . Write the model equation  26 . Find the number of miles 

for the cost of renting a for the cost of renting a that would generate the 
truck with plan A. truck with plan B. same cost for both plans. 

27 . If Tim knows he has to 
travel 300 mi, which plan 
should he choose? 

For the following exercises, use the formula given to solve for the required value. 

28 .  is used to  29 . The formula  30 .  indicates that 
find the principal amount P relates force , velocity force (F) equals mass (m) 
deposited, earning r% , mass , and resistance times acceleration (a). Find 
interest, for t years. Use . Find  when the acceleration of a mass 
this to find what principal  and of 50 kg if a force of 12 N is 
amount P David invested at exerted on it. 
a 3% rate for 20 yr if 

31 .  is the formula 
for an infinite series sum. If 
the sum is 5, find 

Access for free at openstax.org



2.3 • Models and Applications     121

For the following exercises, solve for the given variable in the formula. After obtaining a new version of the formula, you 
will use it to solve a question. 

32 . Solve for W:  33 . Use the formula from the  34 . Solve for 
previous question to find 
the width,  of a 
rectangle whose length is 
15 and whose perimeter is 
58. 

35 . Use the formula from the  36 . Solve for  in the slope-  37 . Use the formula from the 
previous question to find intercept formula: previous question to find 
when when the coordinates of 

the point are  and 

38 . The area of a trapezoid is  39 . Solve for h:  40 . Use the formula from the 
given by previous question to find 
Use the formula to find the the height of a trapezoid 
area of a trapezoid with with , 

and 

41 . Find the dimensions of an  42 . Distance equals rate times  43 . Using the formula in the 
American football field. The time,  Find the previous exercise, find the 
length is 200 ft more than distance Tom travels if he is distance that Susan travels 
the width, and the moving at a rate of 55 mi/h if she is moving at a rate of 
perimeter is 1,040 ft. Find for 3.5 h. 60 mi/h for 6.75 h. 
the length and width. Use 
the perimeter formula 

44 . What is the total distance  45 . If the area model for a  46 . Solve for h: 
that two people travel in 3 triangle is  find 
h if one of them is riding a the area of a triangle with 
bike at 15 mi/h and the a height of 16 in. and a 
other is walking at 3 mi/h? base of 11 in. 

47 . Use the formula from the  48 . The volume formula for a  49 . Solve for h: 
previous question to find cylinder is  Using 
the height to the nearest the symbol  in your 
tenth of a triangle with a answer, find the volume of 
base of 15 and an area of a cylinder with a radius, 
215. of 4 cm and a height of 14 

cm. 

50 . Use the formula from the  51 . Solve for r:  52 . Use the formula from the 
previous question to find previous question to find 
the height of a cylinder the radius of a cylinder 
with a radius of 8 and a with a height of 36 and a 
volume of volume of 

53 . The formula for the  54 . Solve the formula from the 
circumference of a circle is previous question for 

 Find the Notice why  is sometimes 
circumference of a circle defined as the ratio of the 
with a diameter of 12 in. circumference to its 
(diameter = 2r). Use the diameter. 
symbol  in your final 
answer. 



122     2 • Equations and Inequalities

2.4 Complex Numbers 
Learning Objectives 
In this section, you will: 

Add and subtract complex numbers. 
Multiply and divide complex numbers. 
Simplify powers of 

Figure 1 
Discovered by Benoit Mandelbrot around 1980, the Mandelbrot Set is one of the most recognizable fractal images. The 
image is built on the theory of self-similarity and the operation of iteration. Zooming in on a fractal image brings many 
surprises, particularly in the high level of repetition of detail that appears as magnification increases. The equation that 
generates this image turns out to be rather simple. 
In order to better understand it, we need to become familiar with a new set of numbers. Keep in mind that the study of 
mathematics continuously builds upon itself. Negative integers, for example, fill a void left by the set of positive integers. 
The set of rational numbers, in turn, fills a void left by the set of integers. The set of real numbers fills a void left by the 
set of rational numbers. Not surprisingly, the set of real numbers has voids as well. In this section, we will explore a set 
of numbers that fills voids in the set of real numbers and find out how to work within it. 

Expressing Square Roots of Negative Numbers as Multiples of 
We know how to find the square root of any positive real number. In a similar way, we can find the square root of any 
negative number. The difference is that the root is not real. If the value in the radicand is negative, the root is said to be 
an imaginary number. The imaginary number  is defined as the square root of 

So, using properties of radicals, 

We can write the square root of any negative number as a multiple of  Consider the square root of 

We use  and not  because the principal root of  is the positive root. 
A complex number is the sum of a real number and an imaginary number. A complex number is expressed in standard 
form when written  where  is the real part and  is the imaginary part. For example,  is a complex number. 
So, too, is 

Imaginary numbers differ from real numbers in that a squared imaginary number produces a negative real number. 
Recall that when a positive real number is squared, the result is a positive real number and when a negative real number 
is squared, the result is also a positive real number. Complex numbers consist of real and imaginary numbers. 

Access for free at openstax.org



2.4 • Complex Numbers     123

Imaginary and Complex Numbers 

A complex number is a number of the form  where 

•  is the real part of the complex number. 
•  is the imaginary part of the complex number. 

If  then  is a real number. If  and  is not equal to 0, the complex number is called a pure imaginary 
number. An imaginary number is an even root of a negative number. 

...
HOW TO 

Given an imaginary number, express it in the standard form of a complex number. 

1. Write  as 
2. Express  as 
3. Write  in simplest form. 

EXAMPLE 1 

Expressing an Imaginary Number in Standard Form 
Express  in standard form. 

Solution 

In standard form, this is 

 TRY IT #1 Express  in standard form. 

Plotting a Complex Number on the Complex Plane 
We cannot plot complex numbers on a number line as we might real numbers. However, we can still represent them 
graphically. To represent a complex number, we need to address the two components of the number. We use the 
complex plane, which is a coordinate system in which the horizontal axis represents the real component and the vertical 
axis represents the imaginary component. Complex numbers are the points on the plane, expressed as ordered pairs 

 where  represents the coordinate for the horizontal axis and  represents the coordinate for the vertical axis. 
Let’s consider the number  The real part of the complex number is  and the imaginary part is 3. We plot the 
ordered pair  to represent the complex number  as shown in Figure 2. 

Figure 2 



124     2 • Equations and Inequalities

Complex Plane 

In the complex plane, the horizontal axis is the real axis, and the vertical axis is the imaginary axis, as shown in Figure 
3. 

Figure 3 

...
HOW TO 

Given a complex number, represent its components on the complex plane. 

1. Determine the real part and the imaginary part of the complex number. 
2. Move along the horizontal axis to show the real part of the number. 
3. Move parallel to the vertical axis to show the imaginary part of the number. 
4. Plot the point. 

EXAMPLE 2 

Plotting a Complex Number on the Complex Plane 
Plot the complex number  on the complex plane. 

Solution 
The real part of the complex number is  and the imaginary part is –4. We plot the ordered pair  as shown in 
Figure 4. 

Figure 4 

 TRY IT #2 Plot the complex number  on the complex plane. 

Adding and Subtracting Complex Numbers 
Just as with real numbers, we can perform arithmetic operations on complex numbers. To add or subtract complex 
numbers, we combine the real parts and then combine the imaginary parts. 

Access for free at openstax.org



2.4 • Complex Numbers     125

Complex Numbers: Addition and Subtraction 

Adding complex numbers: 

Subtracting complex numbers: 

...
HOW TO 

Given two complex numbers, find the sum or difference. 

1. Identify the real and imaginary parts of each number. 
2. Add or subtract the real parts. 
3. Add or subtract the imaginary parts. 

EXAMPLE 3 

Adding and Subtracting Complex Numbers 
Add or subtract as indicated. 

ⓐ   ⓑ  
Solution 

We add the real parts and add the imaginary parts. 

ⓐ ⓑ 
 

 TRY IT #3 Subtract  from 

Multiplying Complex Numbers 
Multiplying complex numbers is much like multiplying binomials. The major difference is that we work with the real and 
imaginary parts separately. 

Multiplying a Complex Number by a Real Number 
Lets begin by multiplying a complex number by a real number. We distribute the real number just as we would with a 
binomial. Consider, for example,  : 

...
HOW TO 

Given a complex number and a real number, multiply to find the product. 

1. Use the distributive property. 
2. Simplify. 



126     2 • Equations and Inequalities

EXAMPLE 4 

Multiplying a Complex Number by a Real Number 
Find the product 

Solution 
Distribute the 4. 

 TRY IT #4 Find the product: 

Multiplying Complex Numbers Together 
Now, let’s multiply two complex numbers. We can use either the distributive property or more specifically the FOIL 
method because we are dealing with binomials. Recall that FOIL is an acronym for multiplying First, Inner, Outer, and 
Last terms together. The difference with complex numbers is that when we get a squared term,  it equals 

...
HOW TO 

Given two complex numbers, multiply to find the product. 

1. Use the distributive property or the FOIL method. 
2. Remember that 
3. Group together the real terms and the imaginary terms 

EXAMPLE 5 

Multiplying a Complex Number by a Complex Number 
Multiply: 

Solution 

 TRY IT #5 Multiply: 

Dividing Complex Numbers 
Dividing two complex numbers is more complicated than adding, subtracting, or multiplying because we cannot divide 
by an imaginary number, meaning that any fraction must have a real-number denominator to write the answer in 
standard form  We need to find a term by which we can multiply the numerator and the denominator that will 
eliminate the imaginary portion of the denominator so that we end up with a real number as the denominator. This term 
is called the complex conjugate of the denominator, which is found by changing the sign of the imaginary part of the 
complex number. In other words, the complex conjugate of  is  For example, the product of  and 
is 

Access for free at openstax.org



2.4 • Complex Numbers     127

The result is a real number. 
Note that complex conjugates have an opposite relationship: The complex conjugate of  is  and the complex 
conjugate of  is  Further, when a quadratic equation with real coefficients has complex solutions, the 
solutions are always complex conjugates of one another. 
Suppose we want to divide  by  where neither  nor  equals zero. We first write the division as a fraction, 
then find the complex conjugate of the denominator, and multiply. 

Multiply the numerator and denominator by the complex conjugate of the denominator. 

Apply the distributive property. 

Simplify, remembering that 

The Complex Conjugate 

The complex conjugate of a complex number  is  It is found by changing the sign of the imaginary part 
of the complex number. The real part of the number is left unchanged. 

• When a complex number is multiplied by its complex conjugate, the result is a real number. 
• When a complex number is added to its complex conjugate, the result is a real number. 

EXAMPLE 6 

Finding Complex Conjugates 
Find the complex conjugate of each number. 

ⓐ   ⓑ  
Solution 

ⓐ The number is already in the form  The complex conjugate is  or 
ⓑ We can rewrite this number in the form  as  The complex conjugate is  or  This can be 
written simply as 

Analysis 
Although we have seen that we can find the complex conjugate of an imaginary number, in practice we generally find the 
complex conjugates of only complex numbers with both a real and an imaginary component. To obtain a real number 
from an imaginary number, we can simply multiply by 

 TRY IT #6 Find the complex conjugate of 



128     2 • Equations and Inequalities

...
HOW TO 

Given two complex numbers, divide one by the other. 

1. Write the division problem as a fraction. 
2. Determine the complex conjugate of the denominator. 
3. Multiply the numerator and denominator of the fraction by the complex conjugate of the denominator. 
4. Simplify. 

EXAMPLE 7 

Dividing Complex Numbers 
Divide:  by 

Solution 
We begin by writing the problem as a fraction. 

Then we multiply the numerator and denominator by the complex conjugate of the denominator. 

To multiply two complex numbers, we expand the product as we would with polynomials (using FOIL). 

Note that this expresses the quotient in standard form. 

Simplifying Powers of i 
The powers of  are cyclic. Let’s look at what happens when we raise  to increasing powers. 

We can see that when we get to the fifth power of  it is equal to the first power. As we continue to multiply  by 
increasing powers, we will see a cycle of four. Let’s examine the next four powers of 

The cycle is repeated continuously:  every four powers. 

Access for free at openstax.org



2.4 • Complex Numbers     129

EXAMPLE 8 

Simplifying Powers of 
Evaluate: 

Solution 
Since  we can simplify the problem by factoring out as many factors of  as possible. To do so, first determine 
how many times 4 goes into 35: 

 TRY IT #7 Evaluate: 

 Q&A Can we write  in other helpful ways? 

As we saw in Example 8, we reduced  to  by dividing the exponent by 4 and using the remainder to 
find the simplified form. But perhaps another factorization of  may be more useful. Table 1 shows 
some other possible factorizations. 

Factorization of 

Reduced form 

Simplified form 

Table 1 

Each of these will eventually result in the answer we obtained above but may require several more 
steps than our earlier method. 

 MEDIA 

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with complex numbers. 

Adding and Subtracting Complex Numbers (https://openstax.org/l/addsubcomplex) 
Multiply Complex Numbers (https://openstax.org/l/multiplycomplex) 
Multiplying Complex Conjugates (https://openstax.org/l/multcompconj) 
Raising i to Powers (https://openstax.org/l/raisingi) 

 2.4 SECTION EXERCISES 
Verbal 

1 . Explain how to add complex  2 . What is the basic principle in  3 . Give an example to show 
numbers. multiplication of complex that the product of two 

numbers? imaginary numbers is not 
always imaginary. 

4 . What is a characteristic of 
the plot of a real number in 
the complex plane? 



130     2 • Equations and Inequalities

Algebraic 

For the following exercises, evaluate the algebraic expressions. 

5 . If  evaluate  6 . If  evaluate  7 . If  evaluate 
given given  given 

8 . If  evaluate  9 . If  evaluate  given  10 . If  evaluate 
 given given 

Graphical 

For the following exercises, plot the complex numbers on the complex plane. 
11 .  12 .  13 . 
14 . 

Numeric 

For the following exercises, perform the indicated operation and express the result as a simplified complex number. 
15 .  16 .  17 . 
18 .  19 .  20 . 
21 .  22 .  23 . 
24 .  25 .  26 . 

27 .  28 .  29 . 

30 .  31 .  32 . 

33 .  34 .  35 . 

36 .  37 .  38 . 

39 .  40 .  41 . 

Technology 

For the following exercises, use a calculator to help answer the questions. 

42 . Evaluate  for  43 . Evaluate  for  44 . Evaluate 
 and . Predict  and . Predict for  and . Predict 

the value if the value if the value for 
45 . Show that a solution of  46 . Show that a solution of 

 is  is 

Extensions 

For the following exercises, evaluate the expressions, writing the result as a simplified complex number. 

47 .  48 .  49 . 

50 .  51 .  52 . 

53 .  54 .  55 . 

56 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



2.5 • Quadratic Equations     131

2.5 Quadratic Equations 
Learning Objectives 
In this section, you will: 

Solve quadratic equations by factoring. 
Solve quadratic equations by the square root property. 
Solve quadratic equations by completing the square. 
Solve quadratic equations by using the quadratic formula. 

Figure 1 
The computer monitor on the left in Figure 1 is a 23.6-inch model and the one on the right is a 27-inch model. 
Proportionally, the monitors appear very similar. If there is a limited amount of space and we desire the largest monitor 
possible, how do we decide which one to choose? In this section, we will learn how to solve problems such as this using 
four different methods. 

Solving Quadratic Equations by Factoring 
An equation containing a second-degree polynomial is called a quadratic equation. For example, equations such as 

 and  are quadratic equations. They are used in countless ways in the fields of engineering, 
architecture, finance, biological science, and, of course, mathematics. 
Often the easiest method of solving a quadratic equation is factoring. Factoring means finding expressions that can be 
multiplied together to give the expression on one side of the equation. 
If a quadratic equation can be factored, it is written as a product of linear terms. Solving by factoring depends on the 
zero-product property, which states that if  then  or  where a and b are real numbers or algebraic 
expressions. In other words, if the product of two numbers or two expressions equals zero, then one of the numbers or 
one of the expressions must equal zero because zero multiplied by anything equals zero. 
Multiplying the factors expands the equation to a string of terms separated by plus or minus signs. So, in that sense, the 
operation of multiplication undoes the operation of factoring. For example, expand the factored expression 

 by multiplying the two factors together. 

The product is a quadratic expression. Set equal to zero,  is a quadratic equation. If we were to factor the 
equation, we would get back the factors we multiplied. 
The process of factoring a quadratic equation depends on the leading coefficient, whether it is 1 or another integer. We 
will look at both situations; but first, we want to confirm that the equation is written in standard form, 
where a, b, and c are real numbers, and  The equation  is in standard form. 
We can use the zero-product property to solve quadratic equations in which we first have to factor out the greatest 
common factor (GCF), and for equations that have special factoring formulas as well, such as the difference of squares, 
both of which we will see later in this section. 

The Zero-Product Property and Quadratic Equations 

The zero-product property states 

where a and b are real numbers or algebraic expressions. 



132     2 • Equations and Inequalities

A quadratic equation is an equation containing a second-degree polynomial; for example 

where a, b, and c are real numbers, and if  it is in standard form. 

Solving Quadratics with a Leading Coefficient of 1 
In the quadratic equation  the leading coefficient, or the coefficient of  is 1. We have one method of 
factoring quadratic equations in this form. 

...
HOW TO 

Given a quadratic equation with the leading coefficient of 1, factor it. 

1. Find two numbers whose product equals c and whose sum equals b. 
2. Use those numbers to write two factors of the form  where k is one of the numbers found in 

step 1. Use the numbers exactly as they are. In other words, if the two numbers are 1 and  the factors are 

3. Solve using the zero-product property by setting each factor equal to zero and solving for the variable. 

EXAMPLE 1 

Factoring and Solving a Quadratic with Leading Coefficient of 1 
Factor and solve the equation: 

Solution 
To factor  we look for two numbers whose product equals  and whose sum equals 1. Begin by looking 
at the possible factors of 

The last pair,  sums to 1, so these are the numbers. Note that only one pair of numbers will work. Then, write the 
factors. 

To solve this equation, we use the zero-product property. Set each factor equal to zero and solve. 

The two solutions are  and  We can see how the solutions relate to the graph in Figure 2. The solutions are the 
x-intercepts of 

Access for free at openstax.org



2.5 • Quadratic Equations     133

Figure 2 

 TRY IT #1 Factor and solve the quadratic equation: 

EXAMPLE 2 

Solve the Quadratic Equation by Factoring 
Solve the quadratic equation by factoring: 

Solution 
Find two numbers whose product equals  and whose sum equals  List the factors of 

The numbers that add to 8 are 3 and 5. Then, write the factors, set each factor equal to zero, and solve. 

The solutions are  and 

 TRY IT #2 Solve the quadratic equation by factoring: 



134     2 • Equations and Inequalities

EXAMPLE 3 

Using the Zero-Product Property to Solve a Quadratic Equation Written as the Difference of Squares 
Solve the difference of squares equation using the zero-product property: 

Solution 
Recognizing that the equation represents the difference of squares, we can write the two factors by taking the square 
root of each term, using a minus sign as the operator in one factor and a plus sign as the operator in the other. Solve 
using the zero-factor property. 

The solutions are  and 

 TRY IT #3 Solve by factoring: 

Solving a Quadratic Equation by Factoring when the Leading Coefficient is not 1 
When the leading coefficient is not 1, we factor a quadratic equation using the method called grouping, which requires 
four terms. With the equation in standard form, let’s review the grouping procedures: 

1. With the quadratic in standard form,  multiply 
2. Find two numbers whose product equals  and whose sum equals 
3. Rewrite the equation replacing the  term with two terms using the numbers found in step 2 as coefficients of x. 
4. Factor the first two terms and then factor the last two terms. The expressions in parentheses must be exactly the 

same to use grouping. 
5. Factor out the expression in parentheses. 
6. Set the expressions equal to zero and solve for the variable. 

EXAMPLE 4 

Solving a Quadratic Equation Using Grouping 
Use grouping to factor and solve the quadratic equation: 

Solution 
First, multiply  Then list the factors of 

The only pair of factors that sums to  is  Rewrite the equation replacing the b term,  with two terms using 3 
and 12 as coefficients of x. Factor the first two terms, and then factor the last two terms. 

Solve using the zero-product property. 

Access for free at openstax.org



2.5 • Quadratic Equations     135

The solutions are  and  See Figure 3. 

Figure 3 

 TRY IT #4 Solve using factoring by grouping: 

EXAMPLE 5 

Solving a Polynomial of Higher Degree by Factoring 
Solve the equation by factoring: 

Solution 
This equation does not look like a quadratic, as the highest power is 3, not 2. Recall that the first thing we want to do 
when solving any equation is to factor out the GCF, if one exists. And it does here. We can factor out  from all of the 
terms and then proceed with grouping. 

Use grouping on the expression in parentheses. 

Now, we use the zero-product property. Notice that we have three factors. 



136     2 • Equations and Inequalities

The solutions are   and 

 TRY IT #5 Solve by factoring: 

Using the Square Root Property 
When there is no linear term in the equation, another method of solving a quadratic equation is by using the square 
root property, in which we isolate the  term and take the square root of the number on the other side of the equals 
sign. Keep in mind that sometimes we may have to manipulate the equation to isolate the  term so that the square 
root property can be used. 

The Square Root Property 

With the  term isolated, the square root property states that: 

where k is a nonzero real number. 

...
HOW TO 

Given a quadratic equation with an  term but no  term, use the square root property to solve it. 

1. Isolate the  term on one side of the equal sign. 
2. Take the square root of both sides of the equation, putting a  sign before the expression on the side opposite 

the squared term. 
3. Simplify the numbers on the side with the  sign. 

EXAMPLE 6 

Solving a Simple Quadratic Equation Using the Square Root Property 
Solve the quadratic using the square root property: 

Solution 
Take the square root of both sides, and then simplify the radical. Remember to use a  sign before the radical symbol. 

The solutions are  

Access for free at openstax.org



2.5 • Quadratic Equations     137

EXAMPLE 7 

Solving a Quadratic Equation Using the Square Root Property 
Solve the quadratic equation: 

Solution 
First, isolate the  term. Then take the square root of both sides. 

The solutions are  and 

 TRY IT #6 Solve the quadratic equation using the square root property: 

Completing the Square 
Not all quadratic equations can be factored or can be solved in their original form using the square root property. In 
these cases, we may use a method for solving a quadratic equation known as completing the square. Using this 
method, we add or subtract terms to both sides of the equation until we have a perfect square trinomial on one side of 
the equal sign. We then apply the square root property. To complete the square, the leading coefficient, a, must equal 1. 
If it does not, then divide the entire equation by a. Then, we can use the following procedures to solve a quadratic 
equation by completing the square. 

We will use the example  to illustrate each step. 
1. Given a quadratic equation that cannot be factored, and with  first add or subtract the constant term to the 

right side of the equal sign. 

2. Multiply the b term by  and square it. 

3. Add  to both sides of the equal sign and simplify the right side. We have 

4. The left side of the equation can now be factored as a perfect square. 

5. Use the square root property and solve. 

6. The solutions are  and 



138     2 • Equations and Inequalities

EXAMPLE 8 

Solving a Quadratic by Completing the Square 
Solve the quadratic equation by completing the square: 

Solution 
First, move the constant term to the right side of the equal sign. 

Then, take  of the b term and square it. 

Add the result to both sides of the equal sign. 

Factor the left side as a perfect square and simplify the right side. 

Use the square root property and solve. 

The solutions are  and  . 

 TRY IT #7 Solve by completing the square: 

Using the Quadratic Formula 
The fourth method of solving a quadratic equation is by using the quadratic formula, a formula that will solve all 
quadratic equations. Although the quadratic formula works on any quadratic equation in standard form, it is easy to 
make errors in substituting the values into the formula. Pay close attention when substituting, and use parentheses 
when inserting a negative number. 
We can derive the quadratic formula by completing the square. We will assume that the leading coefficient is positive; if 
it is negative, we can multiply the equation by  and obtain a positive a. Given   we will 
complete the square as follows: 
1. First, move the constant term to the right side of the equal sign: 

2. As we want the leading coefficient to equal 1, divide through by a: 

3. Then, find  of the middle term, and add  to both sides of the equal sign: 

Access for free at openstax.org



2.5 • Quadratic Equations     139

4. Next, write the left side as a perfect square. Find the common denominator of the right side and write it as a single 
fraction: 

5. Now, use the square root property, which gives 

6. Finally, add  to both sides of the equation and combine the terms on the right side. Thus, 

The Quadratic Formula 

Written in standard form,  any quadratic equation can be solved using the quadratic formula: 

where a, b, and c are real numbers and 

...
HOW TO 

Given a quadratic equation, solve it using the quadratic formula 

1. Make sure the equation is in standard form: 
2. Make note of the values of the coefficients and constant term,  and 
3. Carefully substitute the values noted in step 2 into the equation. To avoid needless errors, use parentheses 

around each number input into the formula. 
4. Calculate and solve. 

EXAMPLE 9 

Solve the Quadratic Equation Using the Quadratic Formula 
Solve the quadratic equation: 

Solution 
Identify the coefficients:  Then use the quadratic formula. 

EXAMPLE 10 

Solving a Quadratic Equation with the Quadratic Formula 
Use the quadratic formula to solve 



140     2 • Equations and Inequalities

Solution 
First, we identify the coefficients:  and 
Substitute these values into the quadratic formula. 

The solutions to the equation are  and 

 TRY IT #8 Solve the quadratic equation using the quadratic formula: 

The Discriminant 
The quadratic formula not only generates the solutions to a quadratic equation, it tells us about the nature of the 
solutions when we consider the discriminant, or the expression under the radical,  The discriminant tells us 
whether the solutions are real numbers or complex numbers, and how many solutions of each type to expect. Table 1 
relates the value of the discriminant to the solutions of a quadratic equation. 

Value of Discriminant Results 

One rational solution (double solution) 

 perfect square Two rational solutions 

 not a perfect square Two irrational solutions 

Two complex solutions 

Table 1 

The Discriminant 

For  , where  ,  , and  are real numbers, the discriminant is the expression under the radical in 
the quadratic formula:  It tells us whether the solutions are real numbers or complex numbers and how 
many solutions of each type to expect. 

EXAMPLE 11 

Using the Discriminant to Find the Nature of the Solutions to a Quadratic Equation 
Use the discriminant to find the nature of the solutions to the following quadratic equations: 

ⓐ   ⓑ   ⓒ   ⓓ  
Solution 

Calculate the discriminant  for each equation and state the expected type of solutions. 

Access for free at openstax.org



2.5 • Quadratic Equations     141

ⓐ 
 There will be one rational double solution. 

ⓑ 
 As  is a perfect square, there will be two rational solutions. 

ⓒ 
 As  is a perfect square, there will be two rational solutions. 

ⓓ 
 There will be two complex solutions. 

Using the Pythagorean Theorem 
One of the most famous formulas in mathematics is the Pythagorean Theorem. It is based on a right triangle, and 
states the relationship among the lengths of the sides as  where  and  refer to the legs of a right triangle 
adjacent to the  angle, and  refers to the hypotenuse. It has immeasurable uses in architecture, engineering, the 
sciences, geometry, trigonometry, and algebra, and in everyday applications. 
We use the Pythagorean Theorem to solve for the length of one side of a triangle when we have the lengths of the other 
two. Because each of the terms is squared in the theorem, when we are solving for a side of a triangle, we have a 
quadratic equation. We can use the methods for solving quadratic equations that we learned in this section to solve for 
the missing side. 
The Pythagorean Theorem is given as 

where  and  refer to the legs of a right triangle adjacent to the  angle, and  refers to the hypotenuse, as shown in 
Figure 4. 

Figure 4 

EXAMPLE 12 

Finding the Length of the Missing Side of a Right Triangle 
Find the length of the missing side of the right triangle in Figure 5. 

Figure 5 



142     2 • Equations and Inequalities

Solution 
As we have measurements for side b and the hypotenuse, the missing side is a. 

 TRY IT #9 Use the Pythagorean Theorem to solve the right triangle problem: Leg a measures 4 units, leg b
measures 3 units. Find the length of the hypotenuse. 

 MEDIA 

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with quadratic equations. 

Solving Quadratic Equations by Factoring (https://openstax.org/l/quadreqfactor) 
The Zero-Product Property (https://openstax.org/l/zeroprodprop) 
Completing the Square (https://openstax.org/l/complthesqr) 
Quadratic Formula with Two Rational Solutions (https://openstax.org/l/quadrformrat) 
Length of a leg of a right triangle (https://openstax.org/l/leglengthtri) 

 2.5 SECTION EXERCISES 
Verbal 

1 . How do we recognize when  2 . When we solve a quadratic  3 . When we solve a quadratic 
an equation is quadratic? equation, how many equation by factoring, why 

solutions should we always do we move all terms to one 
start out seeking? Explain side, having zero on the 
why when solving a other side? 
quadratic equation in the 
form  we 
may graph the equation 

 and have 
no zeroes (x-intercepts). 

4 . In the quadratic formula,  5 . Describe two scenarios 
what is the name of the where using the square root 
expression under the radical property to solve a 
sign  and how does quadratic equation would 
it determine the number of be the most efficient 
and nature of our solutions? method. 

Algebraic 

For the following exercises, solve the quadratic equation by factoring. 

6 .  7 .  8 . 

9 .  10 .  11 . 

12 .  13 .  14 . 

15 .  16 .  17 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



2.5 • Quadratic Equations     143

18 . 

For the following exercises, solve the quadratic equation by using the square root property. 

19 .  20 .  21 . 

22 .  23 .  24 . 

For the following exercises, solve the quadratic equation by completing the square. Show each step. 

25 .  26 .  27 . 

28 .  29 .  30 . 

31 . 

For the following exercises, determine the discriminant, and then state how many solutions there are and the nature of 
the solutions. Do not solve. 

32 .  33 .  34 . 

35 .  36 .  37 . 

For the following exercises, solve the quadratic equation by using the quadratic formula. If the solutions are not real, 
state No Real Solution. 

38 .  39 .  40 . 

41 .  42 .  43 . 

Technology 

For the following exercises, enter the expressions into your graphing utility and find the zeroes to the equation (the 
x-intercepts) by using 2nd CALC 2:zero. Recall finding zeroes will ask left bound (move your cursor to the left of the 
zero,enter), then right bound (move your cursor to the right of the zero,enter), then guess (move your cursor between 
the bounds near the zero, enter). Round your answers to the nearest thousandth. 

44 .  45 .  46 . 
47 . To solve the quadratic  48 . To solve the quadratic 

equation equation 
we can graph these two  we 
equations can graph these two 

equations 

and find the points of 
intersection. Recall 2nd and find the points of 
CALC 5:intersection. Do intersection. Recall 2nd 

this and find the solutions CALC 5:intersection. Do 
to the nearest tenth. this and find the solutions 

to the nearest tenth. 



144     2 • Equations and Inequalities

Extensions 

49 . Beginning with the general  50 . Show that the sum of the  51 . A person has a garden that 
form of a quadratic two solutions to the has a length 10 feet longer 
equation, quadratic equation is  . than the width. Set up a 

 solve for quadratic equation to find 
x by using the completing the dimensions of the 
the square method, thus garden if its area is 119 ft.2. 
deriving the quadratic Solve the quadratic 
formula. equation to find the length 

and width. 
52 . Abercrombie and Fitch  53 . Suppose that an equation 

stock had a price given as is given 

where  is the time in where  represents the 
months from 1999 to 2001. number of items sold at an 
(  is January 1999). auction and  is the profit 
Find the two months in made by the business that 
which the price of the stock ran the auction. How many 
was $30. items sold would make this 

profit a maximum? Solve 
this by graphing the 
expression in your 
graphing utility and finding 
the maximum using 2nd 

CALC maximum. To obtain 
a good window for the 
curve, set  [0,200] and 
[0,10000]. 

Real-World Applications 

54 . A formula for the normal  55. The cost function for a  56 . A falling object travels a 
systolic blood pressure for a certain company is distance given by the 
man age  measured in  and the formula  ft, 
mmHg, is given as revenue is given by where  is measured in 

 Recall seconds. How long will it 
Find the age to the nearest that profit is revenue take for the object to travel 
year of a man whose normal minus cost. Set up a 74 ft? 
blood pressure measures quadratic equation and 
125 mmHg. find two values of x 

(production level) that will 
create a profit of $300. 

Access for free at openstax.org



2.6 • Other Types of Equations     145

57 . A vacant lot is being converted  58 . An epidemiological study 
into a community garden. The of the spread of a certain 
garden and the walkway around influenza strain that hit a 
its perimeter have an area of 378 small school population 
ft2. Find the width of the walkway found that the total 
if the garden is 12 ft. wide by 15 number of students, , 
ft. long. who contracted the flu 

days after it broke out is 
given by the model 

where  Find the 
day that 160 students had 
the flu. Recall that the 
restriction on  is at most 6. 

2.6 Other Types of Equations 
Learning Objectives 
In this section, you will: 

Solve equations involving rational exponents. 
Solve equations using factoring. 
Solve radical equations. 
Solve absolute value equations. 
Solve other types of equations. 

We have solved linear equations, rational equations, and quadratic equations using several methods. However, there are 
many other types of equations, and we will investigate a few more types in this section. We will look at equations 
involving rational exponents, polynomial equations, radical equations, absolute value equations, equations in quadratic 
form, and some rational equations that can be transformed into quadratics. Solving any equation, however, employs the 
same basic algebraic rules. We will learn some new techniques as they apply to certain equations, but the algebra never 
changes. 

Solving Equations Involving Rational Exponents 
Rational exponents are exponents that are fractions, where the numerator is a power and the denominator is a root. For 
example,  is another way of writing   is another way of writing ​  The ability to work with rational 
exponents is a useful skill, as it is highly applicable in calculus. 
We can solve equations in which a variable is raised to a rational exponent by raising both sides of the equation to the 
reciprocal of the exponent. The reason we raise the equation to the reciprocal of the exponent is because we want to 
eliminate the exponent on the variable term, and a number multiplied by its reciprocal equals 1. For example, 

 and so on. 

Rational Exponents 

A rational exponent indicates a power in the numerator and a root in the denominator. There are multiple ways of 
writing an expression, a variable, or a number with a rational exponent: 



146     2 • Equations and Inequalities

EXAMPLE 1 

Evaluating a Number Raised to a Rational Exponent 
Evaluate 

Solution 
Whether we take the root first or the power first depends on the number. It is easy to find the cube root of 8, so rewrite 

 as 

 TRY IT #1 Evaluate 

EXAMPLE 2 

Solve the Equation Including a Variable Raised to a Rational Exponent 
Solve the equation in which a variable is raised to a rational exponent: 

Solution 
The way to remove the exponent on x is by raising both sides of the equation to a power that is the reciprocal of 
which is 

 TRY IT #2 Solve the equation 

EXAMPLE 3 

Solving an Equation Involving Rational Exponents and Factoring 
Solve 

Solution 
This equation involves rational exponents as well as factoring rational exponents. Let us take this one step at a time. 
First, put the variable terms on one side of the equal sign and set the equation equal to zero. 

Now, it looks like we should factor the left side, but what do we factor out? We can always factor the term with the lowest 
exponent. Rewrite  as  Then, factor out  from both terms on the left. 

Access for free at openstax.org



2.6 • Other Types of Equations     147

Where did  come from? Remember, when we multiply two numbers with the same base, we add the exponents. 
Therefore, if we multiply  back in using the distributive property, we get the expression we had before the factoring, 
which is what should happen. We need an exponent such that when added to  equals  Thus, the exponent on x in 
the parentheses is 

Let us continue. Now we have two factors and can use the zero factor theorem. 

The two solutions are  and 

 TRY IT #3 Solve: 

Solving Equations Using Factoring 
We have used factoring to solve quadratic equations, but it is a technique that we can use with many types of polynomial 
equations, which are equations that contain a string of terms including numerical coefficients and variables. When we 
are faced with an equation containing polynomials of degree higher than 2, we can often solve them by factoring. 

Polynomial Equations 

A polynomial of degree n is an expression of the type 

where n is a positive integer and  are real numbers and 

Setting the polynomial equal to zero gives a polynomial equation. The total number of solutions (real and complex) 
to a polynomial equation is equal to the highest exponent n. 

EXAMPLE 4 

Solving a Polynomial by Factoring 
Solve the polynomial by factoring: 

Solution 
First, set the equation equal to zero. Then factor out what is common to both terms, the GCF. 



148     2 • Equations and Inequalities

Notice that we have the difference of squares in the factor  which we will continue to factor and obtain two 
solutions. The first term,  generates, technically, two solutions as the exponent is 2, but they are the same solution. 

The solutions are   and 

Analysis 
We can see the solutions on the graph in Figure 1. The x-coordinates of the points where the graph crosses the x-axis are 
the solutions—the x-intercepts. Notice on the graph that at the solution  the graph touches the x-axis and bounces 
back. It does not cross the x-axis. This is typical of double solutions. 

Figure 1 

 TRY IT #4 Solve by factoring: 

EXAMPLE 5 

Solve a Polynomial by Grouping 
Solve a polynomial by grouping: 

Solution 
This polynomial consists of 4 terms, which we can solve by grouping. Grouping procedures require factoring the first two 
terms and then factoring the last two terms. If the factors in the parentheses are identical, we can continue the process 
and solve, unless more factoring is suggested. 

The grouping process ends here, as we can factor  using the difference of squares formula. 

Access for free at openstax.org



2.6 • Other Types of Equations     149

The solutions are   and  Note that the highest exponent is 3 and we obtained 3 solutions. We can see the 
solutions, the x-intercepts, on the graph in Figure 2. 

Figure 2 

Analysis 
We looked at solving quadratic equations by factoring when the leading coefficient is 1. When the leading coefficient is 
not 1, we solved by grouping. Grouping requires four terms, which we obtained by splitting the linear term of quadratic 
equations. We can also use grouping for some polynomials of degree higher than 2, as we saw here, since there were 
already four terms. 

Solving Radical Equations 
Radical equations are equations that contain variables in the radicand (the expression under a radical symbol), such as 

Radical equations may have one or more radical terms, and are solved by eliminating each radical, one at a time. We 
have to be careful when solving radical equations, as it is not unusual to find extraneous solutions, roots that are not, in 
fact, solutions to the equation. These solutions are not due to a mistake in the solving method, but result from the 
process of raising both sides of an equation to a power. However, checking each answer in the original equation will 
confirm the true solutions. 

Radical Equations 

An equation containing terms with a variable in the radicand is called a radical equation. 

...
HOW TO 

Given a radical equation, solve it. 

1. Isolate the radical expression on one side of the equal sign. Put all remaining terms on the other side. 
2. If the radical is a square root, then square both sides of the equation. If it is a cube root, then raise both sides of 

the equation to the third power. In other words, for an nth root radical, raise both sides to the nth power. Doing 
so eliminates the radical symbol. 



150     2 • Equations and Inequalities

3. Solve the remaining equation. 
4. If a radical term still remains, repeat steps 1–2. 
5. Confirm solutions by substituting them into the original equation. 

EXAMPLE 6 

Solving an Equation with One Radical 
Solve 

Solution 
The radical is already isolated on the left side of the equal side, so proceed to square both sides. 

We see that the remaining equation is a quadratic. Set it equal to zero and solve. 

The proposed solutions are  and  Let us check each solution back in the original equation. First, check 

This is an extraneous solution. While no mistake was made solving the equation, we found a solution that does not 
satisfy the original equation. 
Check 

The solution is 

 TRY IT #5 Solve the radical equation: 

EXAMPLE 7 

Solving a Radical Equation Containing Two Radicals 
Solve 

Solution 
As this equation contains two radicals, we isolate one radical, eliminate it, and then isolate the second radical. 

Access for free at openstax.org



2.6 • Other Types of Equations     151

Use the perfect square formula to expand the right side: 

Now that both radicals have been eliminated, set the quadratic equal to zero and solve. 

The proposed solutions are  and  Check each solution in the original equation. 

One solution is 
Check 

The only solution is  We see that  is an extraneous solution. 

 TRY IT #6 Solve the equation with two radicals: 

Solving an Absolute Value Equation 
Next, we will learn how to solve an absolute value equation. To solve an equation such as  we notice that 
the absolute value will be equal to 8 if the quantity inside the absolute value bars is  or  This leads to two different 
equations we can solve independently. 



152     2 • Equations and Inequalities

Knowing how to solve problems involving absolute value functions is useful. For example, we may need to identify 
numbers or points on a line that are at a specified distance from a given reference point. 

Absolute Value Equations 

The absolute value of x is written as  It has the following properties: 

For real numbers  and  an equation of the form  with  will have solutions when  or 
If  the equation  has no solution. 

An absolute value equation in the form  has the following properties: 

...
HOW TO 

Given an absolute value equation, solve it. 

1. Isolate the absolute value expression on one side of the equal sign. 
2. If  write and solve two equations:  and 

EXAMPLE 8 

Solving Absolute Value Equations 
Solve the following absolute value equations: 

ⓐ   ⓑ   ⓒ   ⓓ  
Solution 

ⓐ 
Write two equations and solve each: 

ⓑ 
The two solutions are  and  There is no solution as an absolute value cannot be negative. 

ⓒ 
Isolate the absolute value expression and then write two equations. 

There are two solutions:  and 

Access for free at openstax.org



2.6 • Other Types of Equations     153

ⓓ 
(d) 
The equation is set equal to zero, so we have to write only one equation. 

There is one solution: 

 TRY IT #7 Solve the absolute value equation: 

Solving Other Types of Equations 
There are many other types of equations in addition to the ones we have discussed so far. We will see more of them 
throughout the text. Here, we will discuss equations that are in quadratic form, and rational equations that result in a 
quadratic. 

Solving Equations in Quadratic Form 
Equations in quadratic form are equations with three terms. The first term has a power other than 2. The middle term 
has an exponent that is one-half the exponent of the leading term. The third term is a constant. We can solve equations 
in this form as if they were quadratic. A few examples of these equations include 
and  In each one, doubling the exponent of the middle term equals the exponent on the leading 
term. We can solve these equations by substituting a variable for the middle term. 

Quadratic Form 

If the exponent on the middle term is one-half of the exponent on the leading term, we have an equation in 
quadratic form, which we can solve as if it were a quadratic. We substitute a variable for the middle term to solve 
equations in quadratic form. 

...
HOW TO 

Given an equation quadratic in form, solve it. 

1. Identify the exponent on the leading term and determine whether it is double the exponent on the middle term. 
2. If it is, substitute a variable, such as u, for the variable portion of the middle term. 
3. Rewrite the equation so that it takes on the standard form of a quadratic. 
4. Solve using one of the usual methods for solving a quadratic. 
5. Replace the substitution variable with the original term. 
6. Solve the remaining equation. 

EXAMPLE 9 

Solving a Fourth-degree Equation in Quadratic Form 
Solve this fourth-degree equation: 

Solution 
This equation fits the main criteria, that the power on the leading term is double the power on the middle term. Next, we 
will make a substitution for the variable term in the middle. Let  Rewrite the equation in u. 



154     2 • Equations and Inequalities

Now solve the quadratic. 

Solve each factor and replace the original term for u. 

The solutions are  and 

 TRY IT #8 Solve using substitution: 

EXAMPLE 10 

Solving an Equation in Quadratic Form Containing a Binomial 
Solve the equation in quadratic form: 

Solution 
This equation contains a binomial in place of the single variable. The tendency is to expand what is presented. However, 
recognizing that it fits the criteria for being in quadratic form makes all the difference in the solving process. First, make 
a substitution, letting  Then rewrite the equation in u. 

Solve using the zero-factor property and then replace u with the original expression. 

The second factor results in 

We have two solutions:  and 

 TRY IT #9 Solve: 

Solving Rational Equations Resulting in a Quadratic 
Earlier, we solved rational equations. Sometimes, solving a rational equation results in a quadratic. When this happens, 

Access for free at openstax.org



2.6 • Other Types of Equations     155

we continue the solution by simplifying the quadratic equation by one of the methods we have seen. It may turn out that 
there is no solution. 

EXAMPLE 11 

Solving a Rational Equation Leading to a Quadratic 
Solve the following rational equation: 

Solution 
We want all denominators in factored form to find the LCD. Two of the denominators cannot be factored further. 
However,  Then, the LCD is  Next, we multiply the whole equation by the LCD. 

In this case, either solution produces a zero in the denominator in the original equation. Thus, there is no solution. 

 TRY IT #10 Solve 

 MEDIA 

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with different types of equations. 

Rational Equation with no Solution (https://openstax.org/l/rateqnosoln) 
Solving equations with rational exponents using reciprocal powers (https://openstax.org/l/ratexprecpexp) 
Solving radical equations part 1 of 2 (https://openstax.org/l/radeqsolvepart1) 
Solving radical equations part 2 of 2 (https://openstax.org/l/radeqsolvepart2) 

 2.6 SECTION EXERCISES 
Verbal 

1 . In a radical equation, what  2 . Explain why possible  3 . Your friend tries to calculate 
does it mean if a number is solutions must be checked 
an extraneous solution? in radical equations. the value  and keeps 

getting an ERROR message. 
What mistake are they 
probably making? 

4 . Explain why  5 . Explain how to change a 
has no solutions. rational exponent into the 

correct radical expression. 

Algebraic 

For the following exercises, solve the rational exponent equation. Use factoring where necessary. 

6 .  7 .  8 . 



156     2 • Equations and Inequalities

9 .  10 .  11 . 

12 . 

For the following exercises, solve the following polynomial equations by grouping and factoring. 

13 .  14 .  15 . 

16 .  17 .  18 . 

19 . 

For the following exercises, solve the radical equation. Be sure to check all solutions to eliminate extraneous solutions. 

20 .  21 .  22 . 

23 .  24 .  25 . 

26 .  27 .  28 . 

For the following exercises, solve the equation involving absolute value. 
29 .  30 .  31 . 
32 .  33 .  34 . 
35 .  36 . 

For the following exercises, solve the equation by identifying the quadratic form. Use a substitute variable and find all 
real solutions by factoring. 

37 .  38 .  39 . 

40 .  41 . 

Extensions 

For the following exercises, solve for the unknown variable. 

42 .  43 .  44 . 

45 . 

Real-World Applications 

For the following exercises, use the model for the period of a pendulum,  such that  where the length of 
the pendulum is L and the acceleration due to gravity is 
46 . If the acceleration due to  47 . If the gravity is 32 ft/s2 and 

gravity is 9.8 m/s2 and the the period equals 1 s, find 
period equals 1 s, find the the length to the nearest 
length to the nearest cm in. (12 in. = 1 ft). Round 
(100 cm = 1 m). your answer to the nearest 

in. 

For the following exercises, use a model for body surface area, BSA, such that  where w = weight in kg 
and h = height in cm. 
48 . Find the height of a 72-kg  49 . Find the weight of a 

female to the nearest cm 177-cm male to the nearest 
whose kg whose 

Access for free at openstax.org



2.7 • Linear Inequalities and Absolute Value Inequalities     157

2.7 Linear Inequalities and Absolute Value Inequalities 
Learning Objectives 
In this section, you will: 

Use interval notation 
Use properties of inequalities. 
Solve inequalities in one variable algebraically. 
Solve absolute value inequalities. 

Figure 1 
It is not easy to make the honor roll at most top universities. Suppose students were required to carry a course load of at 
least 12 credit hours and maintain a grade point average of 3.5 or above. How could these honor roll requirements be 
expressed mathematically? In this section, we will explore various ways to express different sets of numbers, 
inequalities, and absolute value inequalities. 

Using Interval Notation 
Indicating the solution to an inequality such as  can be achieved in several ways. 
We can use a number line as shown in Figure 2. The blue ray begins at  and, as indicated by the arrowhead, 
continues to infinity, which illustrates that the solution set includes all real numbers greater than or equal to 4. 

Figure 2 
We can use set-builder notation:  which translates to “all real numbers x such that x is greater than or equal 
to 4.” Notice that braces are used to indicate a set. 
The third method is interval notation, in which solution sets are indicated with parentheses or brackets. The solutions 
to  are represented as ∞  This is perhaps the most useful method, as it applies to concepts studied later in 
this course and to other higher-level math courses. 
The main concept to remember is that parentheses represent solutions greater or less than the number, and brackets 
represent solutions that are greater than or equal to or less than or equal to the number. Use parentheses to represent 
infinity or negative infinity, since positive and negative infinity are not numbers in the usual sense of the word and, 
therefore, cannot be “equaled.” A few examples of an interval, or a set of numbers in which a solution falls, are 
or all numbers between  and  including  but not including   all real numbers between, but not including 

 and  and ∞  all real numbers less than and including  Table 1 outlines the possibilities. 

Set Indicated Set-Builder Notation Interval Notation 

All real numbers between a and b, but not including a or b 

All real numbers greater than a, but not including a ∞

All real numbers less than b, but not including b ∞

Table 1 



158     2 • Equations and Inequalities

Set Indicated Set-Builder Notation Interval Notation 

All real numbers greater than a, including a ∞

All real numbers less than b, including b ∞

All real numbers between a and b, including a 

All real numbers between a and b, including b 

All real numbers between a and b, including a and b 

All real numbers less than a or greater than b ∞ ∞

All real numbers ∞ ∞

Table 1 

EXAMPLE 1 

Using Interval Notation to Express All Real Numbers Greater Than or Equal to a 
Use interval notation to indicate all real numbers greater than or equal to 

Solution 
Use a bracket on the left of  and parentheses after infinity: ∞  The bracket indicates that  is included in the 
set with all real numbers greater than  to infinity. 

 TRY IT #1 Use interval notation to indicate all real numbers between and including  and 

EXAMPLE 2 

Using Interval Notation to Express All Real Numbers Less Than or Equal to a or Greater Than or Equal to b 
Write the interval expressing all real numbers less than or equal to  or greater than or equal to 

Solution 
We have to write two intervals for this example. The first interval must indicate all real numbers less than or equal to 1. 
So, this interval begins at ∞  and ends at  which is written as ∞

The second interval must show all real numbers greater than or equal to  which is written as ∞  However, we 
want to combine these two sets. We accomplish this by inserting the union symbol,  between the two intervals. 

∞ ∞

 TRY IT #2 Express all real numbers less than  or greater than or equal to 3 in interval notation. 

Using the Properties of Inequalities 
When we work with inequalities, we can usually treat them similarly to but not exactly as we treat equalities. We can use 
the addition property and the multiplication property to help us solve them. The one exception is when we multiply or 
divide by a negative number; doing so reverses the inequality symbol. 

Access for free at openstax.org



2.7 • Linear Inequalities and Absolute Value Inequalities     159

Properties of Inequalities 

These properties also apply to   and 

EXAMPLE 3 

Demonstrating the Addition Property 
Illustrate the addition property for inequalities by solving each of the following: 

ⓐ   ⓑ   ⓒ  
Solution 

The addition property for inequalities states that if an inequality exists, adding or subtracting the same number on both 
sides does not change the inequality. 

ⓐ ⓑ 
 

ⓒ 

 TRY IT #3 Solve: 

EXAMPLE 4 

Demonstrating the Multiplication Property 
Illustrate the multiplication property for inequalities by solving each of the following: 

ⓐ   ⓑ   ⓒ  
Solution 

ⓐ ⓑ 

 

ⓒ 

 TRY IT #4 Solve: 

Solving Inequalities in One Variable Algebraically 
As the examples have shown, we can perform the same operations on both sides of an inequality, just as we do with 



160     2 • Equations and Inequalities

equations; we combine like terms and perform operations. To solve, we isolate the variable. 

EXAMPLE 5 

Solving an Inequality Algebraically 
Solve the inequality: 

Solution 
Solving this inequality is similar to solving an equation up until the last step. 

The solution set is given by the interval ∞  or all real numbers less than and including 1. 

 TRY IT #5 Solve the inequality and write the answer using interval notation: 

EXAMPLE 6 

Solving an Inequality with Fractions 
Solve the following inequality and write the answer in interval notation: 

Solution 
We begin solving in the same way we do when solving an equation. 

The solution set is the interval ∞

 TRY IT #6 Solve the inequality and write the answer in interval notation: 

Understanding Compound Inequalities 
A compound inequality includes two inequalities in one statement. A statement such as  means  and 

 There are two ways to solve compound inequalities: separating them into two separate inequalities or leaving the 
compound inequality intact and performing operations on all three parts at the same time. We will illustrate both 
methods. 

EXAMPLE 7 

Solving a Compound Inequality 
Solve the compound inequality: 

Solution 
The first method is to write two separate inequalities:  and  We solve them independently. 

Access for free at openstax.org



2.7 • Linear Inequalities and Absolute Value Inequalities     161

Then, we can rewrite the solution as a compound inequality, the same way the problem began. 

In interval notation, the solution is written as 

The second method is to leave the compound inequality intact, and perform solving procedures on the three parts at the 
same time. 

We get the same solution: 

 TRY IT #7 Solve the compound inequality: 

EXAMPLE 8 

Solving a Compound Inequality with the Variable in All Three Parts 
Solve the compound inequality with variables in all three parts: 

Solution 
Let's try the first method. Write two inequalities: 

The solution set is  or in interval notation  Notice that when we write the solution in interval 
notation, the smaller number comes first. We read intervals from left to right, as they appear on a number line. See 
Figure 3. 

Figure 3 

 TRY IT #8 Solve the compound inequality: 

Solving Absolute Value Inequalities 
As we know, the absolute value of a quantity is a positive number or zero. From the origin, a point located at  has 
an absolute value of  as it is x units away. Consider absolute value as the distance from one point to another point. 
Regardless of direction, positive or negative, the distance between the two points is represented as a positive number or 
zero. 
An absolute value inequality is an equation of the form 



162     2 • Equations and Inequalities

Where A, and sometimes B, represents an algebraic expression dependent on a variable x. Solving the inequality means 
finding the set of all  -values that satisfy the problem. Usually this set will be an interval or the union of two intervals 
and will include a range of values. 
There are two basic approaches to solving absolute value inequalities: graphical and algebraic. The advantage of the 
graphical approach is we can read the solution by interpreting the graphs of two equations. The advantage of the 
algebraic approach is that solutions are exact, as precise solutions are sometimes difficult to read from a graph. 
Suppose we want to know all possible returns on an investment if we could earn some amount of money within $200 of 
$600. We can solve algebraically for the set of x-values such that the distance between  and 600 is less than or equal to 
200. We represent the distance between  and 600 as  and therefore,  or 

This means our returns would be between $400 and $800. 
To solve absolute value inequalities, just as with absolute value equations, we write two inequalities and then solve them 
independently. 

Absolute Value Inequalities 

For an algebraic expression X, and  an absolute value inequality is an inequality of the form 

These statements also apply to  and 

EXAMPLE 9 

Determining a Number within a Prescribed Distance 
Describe all values  within a distance of 4 from the number 5. 

Solution 
We want the distance between  and 5 to be less than or equal to 4. We can draw a number line, such as in Figure 4, to 
represent the condition to be satisfied. 

Figure 4 
The distance from  to 5 can be represented using an absolute value symbol,  Write the values of  that satisfy 
the condition as an absolute value inequality. 

We need to write two inequalities as there are always two solutions to an absolute value equation. 

If the solution set is  and  then the solution set is an interval including all real numbers between and 
including 1 and 9. 
So  is equivalent to  in interval notation. 

 TRY IT #9 Describe all x-values within a distance of 3 from the number 2. 

Access for free at openstax.org



2.7 • Linear Inequalities and Absolute Value Inequalities     163

EXAMPLE 10 

Solving an Absolute Value Inequality 
Solve  . 

Solution 

EXAMPLE 11 

Using a Graphical Approach to Solve Absolute Value Inequalities 
Given the equation  determine the x-values for which the y-values are negative. 

Solution 
We are trying to determine where  which is when  We begin by isolating the absolute value. 

Next, we solve for the equality 

Now, we can examine the graph to observe where the y-values are negative. We observe where the branches are below 
the x-axis. Notice that it is not important exactly what the graph looks like, as long as we know that it crosses the 
horizontal axis at  and  and that the graph opens downward. See Figure 5. 

Figure 5 

 TRY IT #10 Solve 

 MEDIA 

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with linear inequalities and absolute value 
inequalities. 



164     2 • Equations and Inequalities

Interval notation (https://openstax.org/l/intervalnotn) 
How to solve linear inequalities (https://openstax.org/l/solvelinineq) 
How to solve an inequality (https://openstax.org/l/solveineq) 
Absolute value equations (https://openstax.org/l/absvaleq) 
Compound inequalities (https://openstax.org/l/compndineqs) 
Absolute value inequalities (https://openstax.org/l/absvalineqs) 

 2.7 SECTION EXERCISES 
Verbal 

1 . When solving an inequality,  2 . When solving an inequality,  3 . When writing our solution in 
explain what happened we arrive at: interval notation, how do we 
from Step 1 to Step 2: represent all the real 

numbers? 
Explain what our solution 
set is. 

4 . When solving an inequality,  5 . Describe how to graph 
we arrive at: 

Explain what our solution 
set is. 

Algebraic 

For the following exercises, solve the inequality. Write your final answer in interval notation. 
6 .  7 .  8 . 

9 .  10 .  11 . 

12 .  13 .  14 . 

For the following exercises, solve the inequality involving absolute value. Write your final answer in interval notation. 
15 .  16 .  17 . 
18 .  19 .  20 . 

21 .  22 .  23 . 

For the following exercises, describe all the x-values within or including a distance of the given values. 
24 . Distance of 5 units from  25 . Distance of 3 units from  26 . Distance of 10 units from 

the number 7 the number 9 the number 4 
27 . Distance of 11 units from 

the number 1 

For the following exercises, solve the compound inequality. Express your answer using inequality signs, and then write 
your answer using interval notation. 
28 .  29 .  30 . 
31 .  32 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



2.7 • Linear Inequalities and Absolute Value Inequalities     165

Graphical 

For the following exercises, graph the function. Observe the points of intersection and shade the x-axis representing the 
solution set to the inequality. Show your graph and write your final answer in interval notation. 
33 . 34 .  35 . 
36 .  37 . 

For the following exercises, graph both straight lines (left-hand side being y1 and right-hand side being y2) on the same 
axes. Find the point of intersection and solve the inequality by observing where it is true comparing the y-values of the 
lines. 
38 .  39 . 40 . 

41 .  42 . 

Numeric 

For the following exercises, write the set in interval notation. 
43 .  44 .  45 . 
46 . 

For the following exercises, write the interval in set-builder notation. 

47 . ∞  48 . ∞  49 . 

50 . ∞

For the following exercises, write the set of numbers represented on the number line in interval notation. 
51 .  52 .  53 . 

Technology 

For the following exercises, input the left-hand side of the inequality as a Y1 graph in your graphing utility. Enter y2 = the 
right-hand side. Entering the absolute value of an expression is found in the MATH menu, Num, 1:abs(. Find the points of 
intersection, recall (2nd CALC 5:intersection, 1st curve, enter, 2nd curve, enter, guess, enter). Copy a sketch of the graph 
and shade the x-axis for your solution set to the inequality. Write final answers in interval notation. 

54 .  55 .  56 . 

57 .  58 . 

Extensions 

59 . Solve  60 . Solve  61 .  

62 .  is 
a profit formula for a small 
business. Find the set of 
x-values that will keep this 
profit positive. 



166     2 • Equations and Inequalities

Real-World Applications 

63 . In chemistry the volume  64 . A basic cellular package 
for a certain gas is given by costs $20/mo. for 60 min of 

 where V is calling, with an additional 
measured in cc and T is charge of $.30/min beyond 
temperature in ºC. If the that time.. The cost 
temperature varies formula would be 
between 80ºC and 120ºC,  If 
find the set of volume you have to keep your bill 
values. no greater than $50, what 

is the maximum calling 
minutes you can use? 

Access for free at openstax.org



2 • Chapter Review     167

Chapter Review 
Key Terms 
absolute value equation  an equation in which the variable appears in absolute value bars, typically with two 

solutions, one accounting for the positive expression and one for the negative expression 
area  in square units, the area formula used in this section is used to find the area of any two-dimensional rectangular 

region: 
Cartesian coordinate system  a grid system designed with perpendicular axes invented by René Descartes 
completing the square  a process for solving quadratic equations in which terms are added to or subtracted from both 

sides of the equation in order to make one side a perfect square 
complex conjugate  a complex number containing the same terms as another complex number, but with the opposite 

operator. Multiplying a complex number by its conjugate yields a real number. 
complex number  the sum of a real number and an imaginary number; the standard form is  where a is the real 

part and  is the complex part. 
complex plane  the coordinate plane in which the horizontal axis represents the real component of a complex number, 

and the vertical axis represents the imaginary component, labeled i. 
compound inequality  a problem or a statement that includes two inequalities 
conditional equation  an equation that is true for some values of the variable 
discriminant  the expression under the radical in the quadratic formula that indicates the nature of the solutions, real 

or complex, rational or irrational, single or double roots. 
distance formula  a formula that can be used to find the length of a line segment if the endpoints are known 
equation in two variables  a mathematical statement, typically written in x and y, in which two expressions are equal 
equations in quadratic form  equations with a power other than 2 but with a middle term with an exponent that is 

one-half the exponent of the leading term 
extraneous solutions  any solutions obtained that are not valid in the original equation 
graph in two variables  the graph of an equation in two variables, which is always shown in two variables in the two-

dimensional plane 
identity equation  an equation that is true for all values of the variable 
imaginary number  the square root of  : 
inconsistent equation  an equation producing a false result 
intercepts  the points at which the graph of an equation crosses the x-axis and the y-axis 
interval  an interval describes a set of numbers within which a solution falls 
interval notation  a mathematical statement that describes a solution set and uses parentheses or brackets to indicate 

where an interval begins and ends 
linear equation  an algebraic equation in which each term is either a constant or the product of a constant and the first 

power of a variable 
linear inequality  similar to a linear equation except that the solutions will include sets of numbers 
midpoint formula  a formula to find the point that divides a line segment into two parts of equal length 
ordered pair  a pair of numbers indicating horizontal displacement and vertical displacement from the origin; also 

known as a coordinate pair, 
origin  the point where the two axes cross in the center of the plane, described by the ordered pair 
perimeter  in linear units, the perimeter formula is used to find the linear measurement, or outside length and width, 

around a two-dimensional regular object; for a rectangle: 
polynomial equation  an equation containing a string of terms including numerical coefficients and variables raised to 

whole-number exponents 
Pythagorean Theorem  a theorem that states the relationship among the lengths of the sides of a right triangle, used 

to solve right triangle problems 
quadrant  one quarter of the coordinate plane, created when the axes divide the plane into four sections 
quadratic equation  an equation containing a second-degree polynomial; can be solved using multiple methods 
quadratic formula  a formula that will solve all quadratic equations 
radical equation  an equation containing at least one radical term where the variable is part of the radicand 
rational equation  an equation consisting of a fraction of polynomials 
slope  the change in y-values over the change in x-values 
solution set  the set of all solutions to an equation 
square root property  one of the methods used to solve a quadratic equation, in which the  term is isolated so that 

the square root of both sides of the equation can be taken to solve for x 
volume  in cubic units, the volume measurement includes length, width, and depth: 
x-axis  the common name of the horizontal axis on a coordinate plane; a number line increasing from left to right 



168     2 • Chapter Review

x-coordinate  the first coordinate of an ordered pair, representing the horizontal displacement and direction from the 
origin 

x-intercept  the point where a graph intersects the x-axis; an ordered pair with a y-coordinate of zero 
y-axis  the common name of the vertical axis on a coordinate plane; a number line increasing from bottom to top 
y-coordinate  the second coordinate of an ordered pair, representing the vertical displacement and direction from the 

origin 
y-intercept  a point where a graph intercepts the y-axis; an ordered pair with an x-coordinate of zero 
zero-product property  the property that formally states that multiplication by zero is zero, so that each factor of a 

quadratic equation can be set equal to zero to solve equations 

Key Equations 

quadratic formula 

Distance 

Slope of a line 

Point-Slope equation of a line 

Adding Complex Numbers 

Subtracting Complex Numbers 

Square Root Property 

Quadratic Formula 

Rational Exponents 

Absolute Value 

Addition Property of Inequalities 

Multiplication Property of Inequalities 

Key Concepts 
2.1 The Rectangular Coordinate Systems and Graphs 

• We can locate, or plot, points in the Cartesian coordinate system using ordered pairs, which are defined as 
displacement from the x-axis and displacement from the y-axis. See Example 1. 

• An equation can be graphed in the plane by creating a table of values and plotting points. See Example 2. 
• Using a graphing calculator or a computer program makes graphing equations faster and more accurate. Equations 

usually have to be entered in the form y=_____. See Example 3. 
• Finding the x- and y-intercepts can define the graph of a line. These are the points where the graph crosses the 

axes. See Example 4. 
• The distance formula is derived from the Pythagorean Theorem and is used to find the length of a line segment. See 

Example 5 and Example 6. 
• The midpoint formula provides a method of finding the coordinates of the midpoint dividing the sum of the 

x-coordinates and the sum of the y-coordinates of the endpoints by 2. See Example 7 and Example 8. 

Access for free at openstax.org



2 • Chapter Review     169

2.2 Linear Equations in One Variable 
• We can solve linear equations in one variable in the form  using standard algebraic properties. See 

Example 1 and Example 2. 
• A rational expression is a quotient of two polynomials. We use the LCD to clear the fractions from an equation. See 

Example 3 and Example 4. 
• All solutions to a rational equation should be verified within the original equation to avoid an undefined term, or 

zero in the denominator. See Example 5 and Example 6 and Example 7. 
• Given two points, we can find the slope of a line using the slope formula. See Example 8. 
• We can identify the slope and y-intercept of an equation in slope-intercept form. See Example 9. 
• We can find the equation of a line given the slope and a point. See Example 10. 
• We can also find the equation of a line given two points. Find the slope and use the point-slope formula. See 

Example 11. 
• The standard form of a line has no fractions. See Example 12. 
• Horizontal lines have a slope of zero and are defined as  where c is a constant. 
• Vertical lines have an undefined slope (zero in the denominator), and are defined as  where c is a constant. 

See Example 13. 
• Parallel lines have the same slope and different y-intercepts. See Example 14 and Example 15. 
• Perpendicular lines have slopes that are negative reciprocals of each other unless one is horizontal and the other is 

vertical. See Example 16. 

2.3 Models and Applications 
• A linear equation can be used to solve for an unknown in a number problem. See Example 1. 
• Applications can be written as mathematical problems by identifying known quantities and assigning a variable to 

unknown quantities. See Example 2. 
• There are many known formulas that can be used to solve applications. Distance problems, for example, are solved 

using the  formula. See Example 3. 
• Many geometry problems are solved using the perimeter formula  the area formula  or the 

volume formula  See Example 4, Example 5, and Example 6. 

2.4 Complex Numbers 
• The square root of any negative number can be written as a multiple of  See Example 1. 
• To plot a complex number, we use two number lines, crossed to form the complex plane. The horizontal axis is the 

real axis, and the vertical axis is the imaginary axis. See Example 2. 
• Complex numbers can be added and subtracted by combining the real parts and combining the imaginary parts. 

See Example 3. 
• Complex numbers can be multiplied and divided. 

◦ To multiply complex numbers, distribute just as with polynomials. See Example 4 and Example 5. 
◦ To divide complex numbers, multiply both numerator and denominator by the complex conjugate of the 

denominator to eliminate the complex number from the denominator. See Example 6 and Example 7. 
• The powers of  are cyclic, repeating every fourth one. See Example 8. 

2.5 Quadratic Equations 
• Many quadratic equations can be solved by factoring when the equation has a leading coefficient of 1 or if the 

equation is a difference of squares. The zero-product property is then used to find solutions. See Example 1, 
Example 2, and Example 3. 

• Many quadratic equations with a leading coefficient other than 1 can be solved by factoring using the grouping 
method. See Example 4 and Example 5. 

• Another method for solving quadratics is the square root property. The variable is squared. We isolate the squared 
term and take the square root of both sides of the equation. The solution will yield a positive and negative solution. 
See Example 6 and Example 7. 

• Completing the square is a method of solving quadratic equations when the equation cannot be factored. See 
Example 8. 

• A highly dependable method for solving quadratic equations is the quadratic formula, based on the coefficients and 
the constant term in the equation. See Example 9 and Example 10. 

• The discriminant is used to indicate the nature of the roots that the quadratic equation will yield: real or complex, 
rational or irrational, and how many of each. See Example 11. 

• The Pythagorean Theorem, among the most famous theorems in history, is used to solve right-triangle problems 



170     2 • Exercises

and has applications in numerous fields. Solving for the length of one side of a right triangle requires solving a 
quadratic equation. See Example 12. 

2.6 Other Types of Equations 
• Rational exponents can be rewritten several ways depending on what is most convenient for the problem. To solve, 

both sides of the equation are raised to a power that will render the exponent on the variable equal to 1. See 
Example 1, Example 2, and Example 3. 

• Factoring extends to higher-order polynomials when it involves factoring out the GCF or factoring by grouping. See 
Example 4 and Example 5. 

• We can solve radical equations by isolating the radical and raising both sides of the equation to a power that 
matches the index. See Example 6 and Example 7. 

• To solve absolute value equations, we need to write two equations, one for the positive value and one for the 
negative value. See Example 8. 

• Equations in quadratic form are easy to spot, as the exponent on the first term is double the exponent on the 
second term and the third term is a constant. We may also see a binomial in place of the single variable. We use 
substitution to solve. See Example 9 and Example 10. 

• Solving a rational equation may also lead to a quadratic equation or an equation in quadratic form. See Example 11. 

2.7 Linear Inequalities and Absolute Value Inequalities 
• Interval notation is a method to indicate the solution set to an inequality. Highly applicable in calculus, it is a system 

of parentheses and brackets that indicate what numbers are included in a set and whether the endpoints are 
included as well. See Table 1 and Example 2. 

• Solving inequalities is similar to solving equations. The same algebraic rules apply, except for one: multiplying or 
dividing by a negative number reverses the inequality. See Example 3, Example 4, Example 5, and Example 6. 

• Compound inequalities often have three parts and can be rewritten as two independent inequalities. Solutions are 
given by boundary values, which are indicated as a beginning boundary or an ending boundary in the solutions to 
the two inequalities. See Example 7 and Example 8. 

• Absolute value inequalities will produce two solution sets due to the nature of absolute value. We solve by writing 
two equations: one equal to a positive value and one equal to a negative value. See Example 9 and Example 10. 

• Absolute value inequalities can also be solved by graphing. At least we can check the algebraic solutions by 
graphing, as we cannot depend on a visual for a precise solution. See Example 11. 

Exercises 
Review Exercises 
The Rectangular Coordinate Systems and Graphs 
For the following exercises, find the x-intercept and the y-intercept without graphing. 
1 .  2 . 

For the following exercises, solve for y in terms of x, putting the equation in slope–intercept form. 
3 .  4 . 

For the following exercises, find the distance between the two points. 
5 .  6 .  7 . Find the distance between 

the two points 
and  using your 
calculator, and round your 
answer to the nearest 
thousandth. 

For the following exercises, find the coordinates of the midpoint of the line segment that joins the two given points. 
8 .  and  9 .  and 

Access for free at openstax.org



2 • Exercises     171

For the following exercises, construct a table and graph the equation by plotting at least three points. 

10 .  11 . 

Linear Equations in One Variable 

For the following exercises, solve for 
12 .  13 .  14 . 

15 .  16 . 

For the following exercises, solve for  State all x-values that are excluded from the solution set. 

17 .  18 . 

For the following exercises, find the equation of the line using the point-slope formula. 
19 . Passes through these two  20 . Passes through the point  21 . Passes through the point 

points:  and has a slope of  and is parallel to 
the graph 

22 . Passes through these two 
points: 

Models and Applications 

For the following exercises, write and solve an equation to answer each question. 
23 . The number of male fish in  24 . A landscaper has 72 ft. of  25 . A truck rental is $25 plus 

the tank is five more than fencing to put around a $.30/mi. Find out how 
three times the number of rectangular garden. If the many miles Ken traveled if 
females. If the total length is 3 times the width, his bill was $50.20. 
number of fish is 73, how find the dimensions of the 
many of each sex are in the garden. 
tank? 

Complex Numbers 

For the following exercises, use the quadratic equation to solve. 

26 .  27 . 

For the following exercises, name the horizontal component and the vertical component. 
28 .  29 . 

For the following exercises, perform the operations indicated. 

30 .  31 .  32 . 

33 .  34 .  35 . 

36 .  37 .  38 . 

39 . 

Quadratic Equations 

For the following exercises, solve the quadratic equation by factoring. 

40 .  41 .  42 . 



172     2 • Exercises

43 . 

For the following exercises, solve the quadratic equation by using the square-root property. 

44 .  45 . 

For the following exercises, solve the quadratic equation by completing the square. 

46 .  47 . 

For the following exercises, solve the quadratic equation by using the quadratic formula. If the solutions are not real, 
state No real solution. 

48 .  49 . 

For the following exercises, solve the quadratic equation by the method of your choice. 

50 .  51 . 

Other Types of Equations 

For the following exercises, solve the equations. 

52 .  53 .  54 . 

55 .  56 .  57 . 

58 .  59 . 

Linear Inequalities and Absolute Value Inequalities 

For the following exercises, solve the inequality. Write your final answer in interval notation. 

60 .  61 .  62 . 

63 .  64 .  65 . 

For the following exercises, solve the compound inequality. Write your answer in interval notation. 
66 .  67 . 

For the following exercises, graph as described. 
68 . Graph the absolute value  69 . Graph both straight lines 

function and graph the (left-hand side being y1 
constant function. Observe and right-hand side being 
the points of intersection y2) on the same axes. Find 
and shade the x-axis the point of intersection 
representing the solution and solve the inequality by 
set to the inequality. Show observing where it is true 
your graph and write your comparing the y-values of 
final answer in interval the lines. See the interval 
notation. where the inequality is 

true. 

Practice Test 
1 . Graph the following: 2 . Find the x- and y-intercepts 3 . Find the x- and y-intercepts 

for the following: of this equation, and sketch 
the graph of the line using 
just the intercepts plotted. 

Access for free at openstax.org



2 • Exercises     173

4 . Find the exact distance 5 . Write the interval notation  6 . Solve for x: 
between  and for the set of numbers 

 Find the represented by 
coordinates of the midpoint 
of the line segment joining 
the two points. 

7 . Solve for :  8 . Solve for x:  9 . Solve for x: 

10 . The perimeter of a triangle  11 . Solve for x. Write the  12 . Solve: 
is 30 in. The longest side is answer in simplest radical 
2 less than 3 times the form. 
shortest side and the other 
side is 2 more than twice 
the shortest side. Find the 
length of each side. 

13 . Solve:  14 . Solve: 

For the following exercises, find the equation of the line with the given information. 
15 . Passes through the points  16 . Has an undefined slope  17 . Passes through the point 

 and and passes through the  and is perpendicular 
point to 

18 . Add these complex  19 . Simplify:  20 . Multiply: 
numbers: 

21 . Divide:  22 . Solve this quadratic  23 . Solve: 
equation and write the two 
complex roots in 
form: 

24 . Solve:  25 . Solve:  26 . Solve: 

27 . Solve:  28 . Solve: 

For the following exercises, find the real solutions of each equation by factoring. 

29 .  30 . 



174     2 • Exercises

Access for free at openstax.org



3 • Introduction to Functions          175

3 FUNCTIONS 

Standard and Poor’s Index with dividends reinvested (credit "bull": modification of work by Prayitno Hadinata; credit 
"graph": modification of work by MeasuringWorth) 

Chapter Outline 
3.1 Functions and Function Notation 
3.2 Domain and Range 
3.3 Rates of Change and Behavior of Graphs 
3.4 Composition of Functions 
3.5 Transformation of Functions 
3.6 Absolute Value Functions 
3.7 Inverse Functions 

Introduction to Functions 
Toward the end of the twentieth century, the values of stocks of Internet and technology companies rose dramatically. As 
a result, the Standard and Poor’s stock market average rose as well. The graph above tracks the value of that initial 
investment of just under $100 over the 40 years. It shows that an investment that was worth less than $500 until about 
1995 skyrocketed up to about $1100 by the beginning of 2000. That five-year period became known as the “dot-com 
bubble” because so many Internet startups were formed. As bubbles tend to do, though, the dot-com bubble eventually 
burst. Many companies grew too fast and then suddenly went out of business. The result caused the sharp decline 
represented on the graph beginning at the end of 2000. 
Notice, as we consider this example, that there is a definite relationship between the year and stock market average. For 
any year we choose, we can determine the corresponding value of the stock market average. In this chapter, we will 
explore these kinds of relationships and their properties. 

3.1 Functions and Function Notation 
Learning Objectives 
In this section, you will: 

Determine whether a relation represents a function. 
Find the value of a function. 
Determine whether a function is one-to-one. 
Use the vertical line test to identify functions. 
Graph the functions listed in the library of functions. 

A jetliner changes altitude as its distance from the starting point of a flight increases. The weight of a growing child 
increases with time. In each case, one quantity depends on another. There is a relationship between the two quantities 



176     3 • Functions

that we can describe, analyze, and use to make predictions. In this section, we will analyze such relationships. 

Determining Whether a Relation Represents a Function 
A relation is a set of ordered pairs. The set of the first components of each ordered pair is called the domain and the set 
of the second components of each ordered pair is called the range. Consider the following set of ordered pairs. The first 
numbers in each pair are the first five natural numbers. The second number in each pair is twice that of the first. 

The domain is  The range is 
Note that each value in the domain is also known as an input value, or independent variable, and is often labeled with 
the lowercase letter  Each value in the range is also known as an output value, or dependent variable, and is often 
labeled lowercase letter 
A function  is a relation that assigns a single value in the range to each value in the domain. In other words, no x-values 
are repeated. For our example that relates the first five natural numbers to numbers double their values, this relation is 
a function because each element in the domain,  is paired with exactly one element in the range, 

Now let’s consider the set of ordered pairs that relates the terms “even” and “odd” to the first five natural numbers. It 
would appear as 

Notice that each element in the domain,  is not paired with exactly one element in the range, 
 For example, the term “odd” corresponds to three values from the range,  and the term 

“even” corresponds to two values from the range,  This violates the definition of a function, so this relation is not 
a function. 
Figure 1 compares relations that are functions and not functions. 

Figure 1 (a) This relationship is a function because each input is associated with a single output. Note that input  and 
both give output  (b) This relationship is also a function. In this case, each input is associated with a single output. (c) 
This relationship is not a function because input  is associated with two different outputs. 

Function 

A function is a relation in which each possible input value leads to exactly one output value. We say “the output is a 
function of the input.” 

The input values make up the domain, and the output values make up the range. 

...
HOW TO 

Given a relationship between two quantities, determine whether the relationship is a function. 

1. Identify the input values. 
2. Identify the output values. 
3. If each input value leads to only one output value, classify the relationship as a function. If any input value leads 

to two or more outputs, do not classify the relationship as a function. 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.1 • Functions and Function Notation     177

EXAMPLE 1 

Determining If Menu Price Lists Are Functions 
The coffee shop menu, shown below, consists of items and their prices. 
ⓐ  Is price a function of the item? 
ⓑ  Is the item a function of the price? 

Solution 
ⓐ  Let’s begin by considering the input as the items on the menu. The output values are then the prices. 

Each item on the menu has only one price, so the price is a function of the item. 
ⓑ  Two items on the menu have the same price. If we consider the prices to be the input values and the items to be the 
output, then the same input value could have more than one output associated with it. See the image below. 

Therefore, the item is a not a function of price. 

EXAMPLE 2 

Determining If Class Grade Rules Are Functions 
In a particular math class, the overall percent grade corresponds to a grade point average. Is grade point average a 
function of the percent grade? Is the percent grade a function of the grade point average? Table 1 shows a possible rule 
for assigning grade points. 

Percent grade 0–56 57–61 62–66 67–71 72–77 78–86 87–91 92–100 

Grade point average 0.0 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0 

Table 1 



178     3 • Functions

Solution 
For any percent grade earned, there is an associated grade point average, so the grade point average is a function of the 
percent grade. In other words, if we input the percent grade, the output is a specific grade point average. 
In the grading system given, there is a range of percent grades that correspond to the same grade point average. For 
example, students who receive a grade point average of 3.0 could have a variety of percent grades ranging from 78 all 
the way to 86. Thus, percent grade is not a function of grade point average. 

 TRY IT #1 Table 21  lists the five greatest baseball players of all time in order of rank. 

Player Rank 

Babe Ruth 1 

Willie Mays 2 

Ty Cobb 3 

Walter Johnson 4 

Hank Aaron 5 

Table 2 

ⓐ Is the rank a function of the player name?  ⓑ Is the player name a function of the rank? 

Using Function Notation 
Once we determine that a relationship is a function, we need to display and define the functional relationships so that 
we can understand and use them, and sometimes also so that we can program them into computers. There are various 
ways of representing functions. A standard function notation is one representation that facilitates working with 
functions. 
To represent “height is a function of age,” we start by identifying the descriptive variables  for height and  for age. The 
letters  and  are often used to represent functions just as we use  and  to represent numbers and 
and  to represent sets. 

Remember, we can use any letter to name the function; the notation  shows us that  depends on  The value 
must be put into the function  to get a result. The parentheses indicate that age is input into the function; they do not 
indicate multiplication. 
We can also give an algebraic expression as the input to a function. For example  means “first add a and b, and 
the result is the input for the function f.” The operations must be performed in this order to obtain the correct result. 

Function Notation 

The notation  defines a function named  This is read as  is a function of  The letter  represents the 
input value, or independent variable. The letter  or  represents the output value, or dependent variable. 

1 http://www.baseball-almanac.com/legendary/lisn100.shtml. Accessed 3/24/2014. 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.1 • Functions and Function Notation     179

EXAMPLE 3 

Using Function Notation for Days in a Month 
Use function notation to represent a function whose input is the name of a month and output is the number of days in 
that month. Assume that the domain does not include leap years. 

Solution 
The number of days in a month is a function of the name of the month, so if we name the function  we write 

 or  The name of the month is the input to a “rule” that associates a specific number (the 
output) with each input. 

Figure 2 
For example,  because March has 31 days. The notation  reminds us that the number of days, 
(the output), is dependent on the name of the month,  (the input). 

Analysis 
Note that the inputs to a function do not have to be numbers; function inputs can be names of people, labels of 
geometric objects, or any other element that determines some kind of output. However, most of the functions we will 
work with in this book will have numbers as inputs and outputs. 

EXAMPLE 4 

Interpreting Function Notation 
A function  gives the number of police officers,  in a town in year  What does  represent? 

Solution 
When we read  we see that the input year is 2005. The value for the output, the number of police officers 

 is 300. Remember,  The statement  tells us that in the year 2005 there were 300 police 
officers in the town. 

 TRY IT #2 Use function notation to express the weight of a pig in pounds as a function of its age in days 

 Q&A Instead of a notation such as  could we use the same symbol for the output as for the 
function, such as  meaning “y is a function of x?” 

Yes, this is often done, especially in applied subjects that use higher math, such as physics and 
engineering. However, in exploring math itself we like to maintain a distinction between a function 
such as  which is a rule or procedure, and the output  we get by applying  to a particular input 
This is why we usually use notation such as  and so on. 

Representing Functions Using Tables 
A common method of representing functions is in the form of a table. The table rows or columns display the 
corresponding input and output values. In some cases, these values represent all we know about the relationship; other 
times, the table provides a few select examples from a more complete relationship. 
Table 3 lists the input number of each month (January = 1, February = 2, and so on) and the output value of the number 
of days in that month. This information represents all we know about the months and days for a given year (that is not a 
leap year). Note that, in this table, we define a days-in-a-month function  where  identifies months by an 
integer rather than by name. 



180     3 • Functions

Month number,  (input) 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 

Days in month,  (output) 31 28 31 30 31 30 31 31 30 31 30 31 

Table 3 

Table 4 defines a function  Remember, this notation tells us that  is the name of the function that takes the 
input  and gives the output 

1 2 3 4 5 

8 6 7 6 8 

Table 4 

Table 5 displays the age of children in years and their corresponding heights. This table displays just some of the data 
available for the heights and ages of children. We can see right away that this table does not represent a function 
because the same input value, 5 years, has two different output values, 40 in. and 42 in. 

Age in years,  (input) 5 5 6 7 8 9 10 

Height in inches,  (output) 40 42 44 47 50 52 54 

Table 5 

...
HOW TO 

Given a table of input and output values, determine whether the table represents a function. 

1. Identify the input and output values. 
2. Check to see if each input value is paired with only one output value. If so, the table represents a function. 

EXAMPLE 5 

Identifying Tables that Represent Functions 
Which table, Table 6, Table 7, or Table 8, represents a function (if any)? 

Input Output 

2 1 

5 3 

8 6 

Table 6 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.1 • Functions and Function Notation     181

Input Output 

–3 5 

0 1 

4 5 

Table 7 

Input Output 

1 0 

5 2 

5 4 

Table 8 

Solution 
Table 6 and Table 7 define functions. In both, each input value corresponds to exactly one output value. Table 8 does not 
define a function because the input value of 5 corresponds to two different output values. 
When a table represents a function, corresponding input and output values can also be specified using function 
notation. 
The function represented by Table 6 can be represented by writing 

Similarly, the statements 

represent the function in Table 7. 
Table 8 cannot be expressed in a similar way because it does not represent a function. 

 TRY IT #3 Does Table 9 represent a function? 

Input Output 

1 10 

2 100 

3 1000 

Table 9 

Finding Input and Output Values of a Function 
When we know an input value and want to determine the corresponding output value for a function, we evaluate the 
function. Evaluating will always produce one result because each input value of a function corresponds to exactly one 
output value. 
When we know an output value and want to determine the input values that would produce that output value, we set 



182     3 • Functions

the output equal to the function’s formula and solve for the input. Solving can produce more than one solution because 
different input values can produce the same output value. 

Evaluation of Functions in Algebraic Forms 
When we have a function in formula form, it is usually a simple matter to evaluate the function. For example, the 
function  can be evaluated by squaring the input value, multiplying by 3, and then subtracting the 
product from 5. 

...
HOW TO 

Given the formula for a function, evaluate. 

1. Substitute the input variable in the formula with the value provided. 
2. Calculate the result. 

EXAMPLE 6 

Evaluating Functions at Specific Values 
Evaluate  at: 

ⓐ   ⓑ   ⓒ   ⓓ  Now evaluate 
Solution 

Replace the  in the function with each specified value. 

ⓐ  Because the input value is a number, 2, we can use simple algebra to simplify. 

ⓑ  In this case, the input value is a letter so we cannot simplify the answer any further. 

ⓒ  With an input value of  we must use the distributive property. 

ⓓ  In this case, we apply the input values to the function more than once, and then perform algebraic operations on 
the result. We already found that 

and we know that 

Now we combine the results and simplify. 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.1 • Functions and Function Notation     183

EXAMPLE 7 

Evaluating Functions 
Given the function  evaluate 

Solution 
To evaluate  we substitute the value 4 for the input variable  in the given function. 

Therefore, for an input of 4, we have an output of 24. 

 TRY IT #4 Given the function  evaluate 

EXAMPLE 8 

Solving Functions 
Given the function  solve for 

Solution 

If  either  or  (or both of them equal 0). We will set each factor equal to 0 and 
solve for  in each case. 

This gives us two solutions. The output  when the input is either  or  We can also verify by graphing 
as in Figure 3. The graph verifies that  and 

Figure 3 

 TRY IT #5 Given the function  solve 

Evaluating Functions Expressed in Formulas 
Some functions are defined by mathematical rules or procedures expressed in equation form. If it is possible to express 
the function output with a formula involving the input quantity, then we can define a function in algebraic form. For 
example, the equation  expresses a functional relationship between  and  We can rewrite it to decide if 



184     3 • Functions

is a function of 
...

HOW TO 

Given a function in equation form, write its algebraic formula. 

1. Solve the equation to isolate the output variable on one side of the equal sign, with the other side as an 
expression that involves only the input variable. 

2. Use all the usual algebraic methods for solving equations, such as adding or subtracting the same quantity to or 
from both sides, or multiplying or dividing both sides of the equation by the same quantity. 

EXAMPLE 9 

Finding the Algebraic Form of a Function 
Express the relationship  as a function  if possible. 

Solution 
To express the relationship in this form, we need to be able to write the relationship where  is a function of  which 
means writing it as 

Therefore,  as a function of  is written as 

Analysis 
It is important to note that not every relationship expressed by an equation can also be expressed as a function with a 
formula. 

EXAMPLE 10 

Expressing the Equation of a Circle as a Function 
Does the equation  represent a function with  as input and  as output? If so, express the relationship as a 
function 

Solution 
First we subtract  from both sides. 

We now try to solve for  in this equation. 

We get two outputs corresponding to the same input, so this relationship cannot be represented as a single function 

 TRY IT #6 If  express  as a function of 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.1 • Functions and Function Notation     185

 Q&A Are there relationships expressed by an equation that do represent a function but which still 
cannot be represented by an algebraic formula? 

Yes, this can happen. For example, given the equation  if we want to express  as a function 
of  there is no simple algebraic formula involving only  that equals  However, each  does 
determine a unique value for  and there are mathematical procedures by which  can be found to 
any desired accuracy. In this case, we say that the equation gives an implicit (implied) rule for  as a 
function of  even though the formula cannot be written explicitly. 

Evaluating a Function Given in Tabular Form 
As we saw above, we can represent functions in tables. Conversely, we can use information in tables to write functions, 
and we can evaluate functions using the tables. For example, how well do our pets recall the fond memories we share 
with them? There is an urban legend that a goldfish has a memory of 3 seconds, but this is just a myth. Goldfish can 
remember up to 3 months, while the beta fish has a memory of up to 5 months. And while a puppy’s memory span is no 
longer than 30 seconds, the adult dog can remember for 5 minutes. This is meager compared to a cat, whose memory 
span lasts for 16 hours. 
The function that relates the type of pet to the duration of its memory span is more easily visualized with the use of a 
table. See Table 10.2 

Pet Memory span in hours 

Puppy 0.008 

Adult dog 0.083 

Cat 16 

Goldfish 2160 

Beta fish 3600 

Table 10 

At times, evaluating a function in table form may be more useful than using equations.Here let us call the function 
The domain of the function is the type of pet and the range is a real number representing the number of hours the pet’s 
memory span lasts. We can evaluate the function  at the input value of “goldfish.” We would write 
Notice that, to evaluate the function in table form, we identify the input value and the corresponding output value from 
the pertinent row of the table. The tabular form for function  seems ideally suited to this function, more so than writing 
it in paragraph or function form. 

...
HOW TO 

Given a function represented by a table, identify specific output and input values. 

1. Find the given input in the row (or column) of input values. 
2. Identify the corresponding output value paired with that input value. 
3. Find the given output values in the row (or column) of output values, noting every time that output value 

appears. 
4. Identify the input value(s) corresponding to the given output value. 

2 http://www.kgbanswers.com/how-long-is-a-dogs-memory-span/4221590. Accessed 3/24/2014. 



186     3 • Functions

EXAMPLE 11 

Evaluating and Solving a Tabular Function 
Using Table 11, 
ⓐ  Evaluate 
ⓑ  Solve 

1 2 3 4 5 

8 6 7 6 8 

Table 11 

Solution 
ⓐ  Evaluating  means determining the output value of the function  for the input value of  The table output 
value corresponding to  is 7, so 
ⓑ  Solving  means identifying the input values,  that produce an output value of 6. The table below shows 
two solutions:  and 

1 2 3 4 5 

8 6 7 6 8 

When we input 2 into the function  our output is 6. When we input 4 into the function  our output is also 6. 

 TRY IT #7 Using the table from Evaluating and Solving a Tabular Function above, evaluate 

Finding Function Values from a Graph 
Evaluating a function using a graph also requires finding the corresponding output value for a given input value, only in 
this case, we find the output value by looking at the graph. Solving a function equation using a graph requires finding all 
instances of the given output value on the graph and observing the corresponding input value(s). 

EXAMPLE 12 

Reading Function Values from a Graph 
Given the graph in Figure 4, 

ⓐ  Evaluate 
ⓑ  Solve 

Figure 4 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.1 • Functions and Function Notation     187

Solution 
ⓐ  To evaluate  locate the point on the curve where  then read the y-coordinate of that point. The point has 
coordinates  so  See Figure 5. 

Figure 5 

ⓑ  To solve  we find the output value  on the vertical axis. Moving horizontally along the line  we 
locate two points of the curve with output value   and  These points represent the two solutions to 

  or  This means  and  or when the input is  or  the output is  See Figure 6. 

Figure 6 

 TRY IT #8 Using Figure 4, solve 

Determining Whether a Function is One-to-One 
Some functions have a given output value that corresponds to two or more input values. For example, in the stock chart 
shown in the figure at the beginning of this chapter, the stock price was $1000 on five different dates, meaning that 
there were five different input values that all resulted in the same output value of $1000. 
However, some functions have only one input value for each output value, as well as having only one output for each 
input. We call these functions one-to-one functions. As an example, consider a school that uses only letter grades and 
decimal equivalents, as listed in Table 12. 

Letter grade Grade point average 

A 4.0 

B 3.0 

Table 12 



188     3 • Functions

Letter grade Grade point average 

C 2.0 

D 1.0 

Table 12 

This grading system represents a one-to-one function, because each letter input yields one particular grade point 
average output and each grade point average corresponds to one input letter. 
To visualize this concept, let’s look again at the two simple functions sketched in Figure 1(a) and Figure 1(b). The function 
in part (a) shows a relationship that is not a one-to-one function because inputs  and  both give output  The function 
in part (b) shows a relationship that is a one-to-one function because each input is associated with a single output. 

One-to-One Function 

A one-to-one function is a function in which each output value corresponds to exactly one input value. 

EXAMPLE 13 

Determining Whether a Relationship Is a One-to-One Function 
Is the area of a circle a function of its radius? If yes, is the function one-to-one? 

Solution 
A circle of radius  has a unique area measure given by  so for any input,  there is only one output,  The area 
is a function of radius 
If the function is one-to-one, the output value, the area, must correspond to a unique input value, the radius. Any area 
measure  is given by the formula  Because areas and radii are positive numbers, there is exactly one solution: 

 So the area of a circle is a one-to-one function of the circle’s radius. 

 TRY IT #9 ⓐ  Is a balance a function of the bank account number? 
ⓑ  Is a bank account number a function of the balance? 
ⓒ  Is a balance a one-to-one function of the bank account number? 

 TRY IT #10 Evaluate the following: 
ⓐ  If each percent grade earned in a course translates to one letter grade, is the letter grade a 
function of the percent grade? 
ⓑ  If so, is the function one-to-one? 

Using the Vertical Line Test 
As we have seen in some examples above, we can represent a function using a graph. Graphs display a great many 
input-output pairs in a small space. The visual information they provide often makes relationships easier to understand. 
By convention, graphs are typically constructed with the input values along the horizontal axis and the output values 
along the vertical axis. 
The most common graphs name the input value  and the output value  and we say  is a function of  or 
when the function is named  The graph of the function is the set of all points  in the plane that satisfies the 
equation  If the function is defined for only a few input values, then the graph of the function is only a few 
points, where the x-coordinate of each point is an input value and the y-coordinate of each point is the corresponding 
output value. For example, the black dots on the graph in Figure 7 tell us that  and  However, the set 
of all points  satisfying  is a curve. The curve shown includes  and  because the curve passes 
through those points. 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.1 • Functions and Function Notation     189

Figure 7 
The vertical line test can be used to determine whether a graph represents a function. If we can draw any vertical line 
that intersects a graph more than once, then the graph does not define a function because a function has only one 
output value for each input value. See Figure 8. 

Figure 8 
...

HOW TO 

Given a graph, use the vertical line test to determine if the graph represents a function. 

1. Inspect the graph to see if any vertical line drawn would intersect the curve more than once. 
2. If there is any such line, determine that the graph does not represent a function. 

EXAMPLE 14 

Applying the Vertical Line Test 
Which of the graphs in Figure 9 represent(s) a function 

Figure 9 



190     3 • Functions

Solution 
If any vertical line intersects a graph more than once, the relation represented by the graph is not a function. Notice that 
any vertical line would pass through only one point of the two graphs shown in parts (a) and (b) of Figure 9. From this we 
can conclude that these two graphs represent functions. The third graph does not represent a function because, at most 
x-values, a vertical line would intersect the graph at more than one point, as shown in Figure 10. 

Figure 10 

 TRY IT #11 Does the graph in Figure 11 represent a function? 

Figure 11 

Using the Horizontal Line Test 
Once we have determined that a graph defines a function, an easy way to determine if it is a one-to-one function is to 
use the horizontal line test. Draw horizontal lines through the graph. If any horizontal line intersects the graph more 
than once, then the graph does not represent a one-to-one function. 

...
HOW TO 

Given a graph of a function, use the horizontal line test to determine if the graph represents a one-to-one 
function. 

1. Inspect the graph to see if any horizontal line drawn would intersect the curve more than once. 
2. If there is any such line, determine that the function is not one-to-one. 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.1 • Functions and Function Notation     191

EXAMPLE 15 

Applying the Horizontal Line Test 
Consider the functions shown in Figure 9(a) and Figure 9(b). Are either of the functions one-to-one? 

Solution 
The function in Figure 9(a) is not one-to-one. The horizontal line shown in Figure 12 intersects the graph of the function 
at two points (and we can even find horizontal lines that intersect it at three points.) 

Figure 12 
The function in Figure 9(b) is one-to-one. Any horizontal line will intersect a diagonal line at most once. 

 TRY IT #12 Is the graph shown in Figure 9(c) one-to-one? 

Identifying Basic Toolkit Functions 
In this text, we will be exploring functions—the shapes of their graphs, their unique characteristics, their algebraic 
formulas, and how to solve problems with them. When learning to read, we start with the alphabet. When learning to do 
arithmetic, we start with numbers. When working with functions, it is similarly helpful to have a base set of building-
block elements. We call these our “toolkit functions,” which form a set of basic named functions for which we know the 
graph, formula, and special properties. Some of these functions are programmed to individual buttons on many 
calculators. For these definitions we will use  as the input variable and  as the output variable. 
We will see these toolkit functions, combinations of toolkit functions, their graphs, and their transformations frequently 
throughout this book. It will be very helpful if we can recognize these toolkit functions and their features quickly by 
name, formula, graph, and basic table properties. The graphs and sample table values are included with each function 
shown in Table 13. 



192     3 • Functions

Toolkit Functions 

Name Function Graph 

Constant  where  is a constant 

Identity 

Absolute value 

Quadratic 

Cubic 

Table 13 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.1 • Functions and Function Notation     193

Toolkit Functions 

Name Function Graph 

Reciprocal 

Reciprocal squared 

Square root 

Cube root 

Table 13 

 MEDIA 

Access the following online resources for additional instruction and practice with functions. 

Determine if a Relation is a Function (https://openstax.org/l/relationfunction) 
Vertical Line Test (https://openstax.org/l/vertlinetest) 
Introduction to Functions (https://openstax.org/l/introtofunction) 
Vertical Line Test on Graph (https://openstax.org/l/vertlinegraph) 
One-to-one Functions (https://openstax.org/l/onetoone) 
Graphs as One-to-one Functions (https://openstax.org/l/graphonetoone) 



194     3 • Functions

 3.1 SECTION EXERCISES 
Verbal 

1 . What is the difference  2 . What is the difference  3 . Why does the vertical line 
between a relation and a between the input and the test tell us whether the 
function? output of a function? graph of a relation 

represents a function? 
4 . How can you determine if a  5 . Why does the horizontal line 

relation is a one-to-one test tell us whether the 
function? graph of a function is one-

to-one? 

Algebraic 

For the following exercises, determine whether the relation represents a function. 
6 .  7 . 

For the following exercises, determine whether the relation represents  as a function of 

8 .  9 .  10 . 

11 .  12 .  13 . 

14 .  15 .  16 . 

17 .  18 .  19 . 

20 .  21 .  22 . 

23 .  24 .  25 . 

26 . 

For the following exercises, evaluate 

27 .  28 .  29 . 

30 .  31 .  32 . Given the function 
 evaluate 

33 . Given the function  34 . Given the function 35 . Given the function 
 evaluate 

ⓐ  Evaluate ⓐ  Evaluate 
ⓑ  Solve ⓑ  Solve 

36 . Given the function 37 . Given the function 38 . Given the function 

ⓐ  Evaluate ⓐ  Evaluate ⓐ  Evaluate 
ⓑ  Solve ⓑ  Solve ⓑ  Solve 

39 . Consider the relationship 

ⓐ  Write the relationship 
as a function 
ⓑ  Evaluate 
ⓒ  Solve 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.1 • Functions and Function Notation     195

Graphical 

For the following exercises, use the vertical line test to determine which graphs show relations that are functions. 
40 . 41 . 42 . 

43 . 44 . 45 . 

46 . 47 . 48 . 

49 . 50 . 51 . 



196     3 • Functions

52 . Given the following graph, 53 . Given the following graph, 54 . Given the following graph, 
ⓐ  Evaluate ⓐ  Evaluate ⓐ  Evaluate 
ⓑ  Solve for ⓑ  Solve for ⓑ  Solve for 

For the following exercises, determine if the given graph is a one-to-one function. 
55 . 56 . 57 . 

58 . 59 . 

Numeric 

For the following exercises, determine whether the relation represents a function. 
60 .  61 .  62 . 

For the following exercises, determine if the relation represented in table form represents  as a function of 
63 .  64 .  65 . 

5 10 15 5 10 15 5 10 10 

3 8 14 3 8 8 3 8 14 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.1 • Functions and Function Notation     197

For the following exercises, use the function  represented in the table below. 

0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 

74 28 1 53 56 3 36 45 14 47 

Table 14 

66 . Evaluate  67 . Solve 

For the following exercises, evaluate the function  at the values  and 

68 .  69 .  70 . 

71 .  72 .  73 . 

For the following exercises, evaluate the expressions, given functions  and 

74 .  75 . 

Technology 

For the following exercises, graph  on the given domain. Determine the corresponding range. Show each graph. 
76 .  77 . 78 . 

For the following exercises, graph  on the given domain. Determine the corresponding range. Show each graph. 
79 . 80 . 
81 . 

For the following exercises, graph  on the given domain. Determine the corresponding range. Show each graph. 

82 .  83 . 
84 . 

For the following exercises, graph  on the given domain. Determine the corresponding range. Show each graph. 

85 . 86 . 
87 . 



198     3 • Functions

Real-World Applications 

88 . The amount of garbage, 89 . The number of cubic yards 90 . Let  be the number of 
produced by a city with of dirt,  needed to cover ducks in a lake  years after 
population  is given by a garden with area 1990. Explain the meaning 

  is measured square feet is given by of each statement: 
in tons per week, and  is ⓐ  
measured in thousands of ⓐ  A garden with area ⓑ  
people. 5000 ft2 requires 50 yd3 of 
ⓐ  The town of Tola has a dirt. Express this 
population of 40,000 and information in terms of the 
produces 13 tons of function 
garbage each week. ⓑ  Explain the meaning of 
Express this information in the statement 
terms of the function 
ⓑ  Explain the meaning of 
the statement 

91 . Let  be the height 92 . Show that the function 
above ground, in feet, of a  is 
rocket  seconds after not one-to-one. 
launching. Explain the 
meaning of each 
statement: 
ⓐ  
ⓑ  

3.2 Domain and Range 
Learning Objectives 
In this section, you will: 

Find the domain of a function defined by an equation. 
Graph piecewise-defined functions. 

Horror and thriller movies are both popular and, very often, extremely profitable. When big-budget actors, shooting 
locations, and special effects are included, however, studios count on even more viewership to be successful. Consider 
five major thriller/horror entries from the early 2000s—I am Legend, Hannibal, The Ring, The Grudge, and The 
Conjuring. Figure 1 shows the amount, in dollars, each of those movies grossed when they were released as well as the 
ticket sales for horror movies in general by year. Notice that we can use the data to create a function of the amount each 
movie earned or the total ticket sales for all horror movies by year. In creating various functions using the data, we can 
identify different independent and dependent variables, and we can analyze the data and the functions to determine the 
domain and range. In this section, we will investigate methods for determining the domain and range of functions such 
as these. 

Figure 1 Based on data compiled by www.the-numbers.com.3 

3 The Numbers: Where Data and the Movie Business Meet. “Box Office History for Horror Movies.” http://www.the-numbers.com/market/genre/

Access for free at openstax.org



3.2 • Domain and Range     199

Finding the Domain of a Function Defined by an Equation 
In Functions and Function Notation, we were introduced to the concepts of domain and range. In this section, we will 
practice determining domains and ranges for specific functions. Keep in mind that, in determining domains and ranges, 
we need to consider what is physically possible or meaningful in real-world examples, such as tickets sales and year in 
the horror movie example above. We also need to consider what is mathematically permitted. For example, we cannot 
include any input value that leads us to take an even root of a negative number if the domain and range consist of real 
numbers. Or in a function expressed as a formula, we cannot include any input value in the domain that would lead us to 
divide by 0. 
We can visualize the domain as a “holding area” that contains “raw materials” for a “function machine” and the range as 
another “holding area” for the machine’s products. See Figure 2. 

Figure 2 
We can write the domain and range in interval notation, which uses values within brackets to describe a set of 
numbers. In interval notation, we use a square bracket [ when the set includes the endpoint and a parenthesis ( to 
indicate that the endpoint is either not included or the interval is unbounded. For example, if a person has $100 to 
spend, they would need to express the interval that is more than 0 and less than or equal to 100 and write  We 
will discuss interval notation in greater detail later. 
Let’s turn our attention to finding the domain of a function whose equation is provided. Oftentimes, finding the domain 
of such functions involves remembering three different forms. First, if the function has no denominator or an odd root, 
consider whether the domain could be all real numbers. Second, if there is a denominator in the function’s equation, 
exclude values in the domain that force the denominator to be zero. Third, if there is an even root, consider excluding 
values that would make the radicand negative. 
Before we begin, let us review the conventions of interval notation: 

• The smallest number from the interval is written first. 
• The largest number in the interval is written second, following a comma. 
• Parentheses, ( or ), are used to signify that an endpoint value is not included, called exclusive. 
• Brackets, [ or ], are used to indicate that an endpoint value is included, called inclusive. 

See Figure 3 for a summary of interval notation. 

Horror. Accessed 3/24/2014 



200     3 • Functions

Figure 3 

EXAMPLE 1 

Finding the Domain of a Function as a Set of Ordered Pairs 
Find the domain of the following function:  . 

Solution 
First identify the input values. The input value is the first coordinate in an ordered pair. There are no restrictions, as the 
ordered pairs are simply listed. The domain is the set of the first coordinates of the ordered pairs. 

 TRY IT #1 Find the domain of the function: 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.2 • Domain and Range     201

...
HOW TO 

Given a function written in equation form, find the domain. 

1. Identify the input values. 
2. Identify any restrictions on the input and exclude those values from the domain. 
3. Write the domain in interval form, if possible. 

EXAMPLE 2 

Finding the Domain of a Function 
Find the domain of the function 

Solution 
The input value, shown by the variable  in the equation, is squared and then the result is lowered by one. Any real 
number may be squared and then be lowered by one, so there are no restrictions on the domain of this function. The 
domain is the set of real numbers. 

In interval form, the domain of  is ∞ ∞

 TRY IT #2 Find the domain of the function: 

...
HOW TO 

Given a function written in an equation form that includes a fraction, find the domain. 

1. Identify the input values. 
2. Identify any restrictions on the input. If there is a denominator in the function’s formula, set the denominator 

equal to zero and solve for  . If the function’s formula contains an even root, set the radicand greater than or 
equal to 0, and then solve. 

3. Write the domain in interval form, making sure to exclude any restricted values from the domain. 

EXAMPLE 3 

Finding the Domain of a Function Involving a Denominator 
Find the domain of the function 

Solution 
When there is a denominator, we want to include only values of the input that do not force the denominator to be zero. 
So, we will set the denominator equal to 0 and solve for 

Now, we will exclude 2 from the domain. The answers are all real numbers where  or  as shown in Figure 4. 
We can use a symbol known as the union,  to combine the two sets. In interval notation, we write the solution: 

∞



202     3 • Functions

Figure 4 

 TRY IT #3 Find the domain of the function: 

...
HOW TO 

Given a function written in equation form including an even root, find the domain. 

1. Identify the input values. 
2. Since there is an even root, exclude any real numbers that result in a negative number in the radicand. Set the 

radicand greater than or equal to zero and solve for 
3. The solution(s) are the domain of the function. If possible, write the answer in interval form. 

EXAMPLE 4 

Finding the Domain of a Function with an Even Root 
Find the domain of the function 

Solution 
When there is an even root in the formula, we exclude any real numbers that result in a negative number in the 
radicand. 
Set the radicand greater than or equal to zero and solve for 

Now, we will exclude any number greater than 7 from the domain. The answers are all real numbers less than or equal to 
 or ∞

 TRY IT #4 Find the domain of the function 

 Q&A Can there be functions in which the domain and range do not intersect at all? 

Yes. For example, the function  has the set of all positive real numbers as its domain but 

the set of all negative real numbers as its range. As a more extreme example, a function’s inputs and 
outputs can be completely different categories (for example, names of weekdays as inputs and 
numbers as outputs, as on an attendance chart), in such cases the domain and range have no 
elements in common. 

Using Notations to Specify Domain and Range 
In the previous examples, we used inequalities and lists to describe the domain of functions. We can also use 
inequalities, or other statements that might define sets of values or data, to describe the behavior of the variable in set-

Access for free at openstax.org



3.2 • Domain and Range     203

builder notation. For example,  describes the behavior of  in set-builder notation. The braces  are 
read as “the set of,” and the vertical bar | is read as “such that,” so we would read  as “the set of x-values 
such that 10 is less than or equal to  and  is less than 30.” 
Figure 5 compares inequality notation, set-builder notation, and interval notation. 

Figure 5 
To combine two intervals using inequality notation or set-builder notation, we use the word “or.” As we saw in earlier 
examples, we use the union symbol,  to combine two unconnected intervals. For example, the union of the sets 

 and  is the set  It is the set of all elements that belong to one or the other (or both) of the 
original two sets. For sets with a finite number of elements like these, the elements do not have to be listed in ascending 
order of numerical value. If the original two sets have some elements in common, those elements should be listed only 
once in the union set. For sets of real numbers on intervals, another example of a union is 

∞ ∞

Set-Builder Notation and Interval Notation 

Set-builder notation is a method of specifying a set of elements that satisfy a certain condition. It takes the form 
 which is read as, “the set of all  such that the statement about  is true.” For example, 

Interval notation is a way of describing sets that include all real numbers between a lower limit that may or may not 
be included and an upper limit that may or may not be included. The endpoint values are listed between brackets or 
parentheses. A square bracket indicates inclusion in the set, and a parenthesis indicates exclusion from the set. For 
example, 



204     3 • Functions

...
HOW TO 

Given a line graph, describe the set of values using interval notation. 

1. Identify the intervals to be included in the set by determining where the heavy line overlays the real line. 
2. At the left end of each interval, use [ with each end value to be included in the set (solid dot) or ( for each 

excluded end value (open dot). 
3. At the right end of each interval, use ] with each end value to be included in the set (filled dot) or ) for each 

excluded end value (open dot). 
4. Use the union symbol  to combine all intervals into one set. 

EXAMPLE 5 

Describing Sets on the Real-Number Line 
Describe the intervals of values shown in Figure 6 using inequality notation, set-builder notation, and interval notation. 

Figure 6 

Solution 
To describe the values,  included in the intervals shown, we would say, “  is a real number greater than or equal to 1 
and less than or equal to 3, or a real number greater than 5.” 

Inequality 

Set-builder notation 

Interval notation ∞

Remember that, when writing or reading interval notation, using a square bracket means the boundary is included in the 
set. Using a parenthesis means the boundary is not included in the set. 

 TRY IT #5 Given Figure 7, specify the graphed set in 

ⓐ  words  ⓑ  set-builder notation  ⓒ  interval notation 

Figure 7 

Finding Domain and Range from Graphs 
Another way to identify the domain and range of functions is by using graphs. Because the domain refers to the set of 
possible input values, the domain of a graph consists of all the input values shown on the x-axis. The range is the set of 
possible output values, which are shown on the y-axis. Keep in mind that if the graph continues beyond the portion of 
the graph we can see, the domain and range may be greater than the visible values. See Figure 8. 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.2 • Domain and Range     205

Figure 8 

We can observe that the graph extends horizontally from  to the right without bound, so the domain is ∞  The 
vertical extent of the graph is all range values  and below, so the range is  Note that the domain and range are 
always written from smaller to larger values, or from left to right for domain, and from the bottom of the graph to the 
top of the graph for range. 

EXAMPLE 6 

Finding Domain and Range from a Graph 
Find the domain and range of the function  whose graph is shown in Figure 9. 

Figure 9 

Solution 
We can observe that the horizontal extent of the graph is –3 to 1, so the domain of  is 
The vertical extent of the graph is 0 to –4, so the range is  See Figure 10. 



206     3 • Functions

Figure 10 

EXAMPLE 7 

Finding Domain and Range from a Graph of Oil Production 
Find the domain and range of the function  whose graph is shown in Figure 11. 

Figure 11 (credit: modification of work by the U.S. Energy Information Administration)4 

Solution 
The input quantity along the horizontal axis is “years,” which we represent with the variable  for time. The output 
quantity is “thousands of barrels of oil per day,” which we represent with the variable  for barrels. The graph may 
continue to the left and right beyond what is viewed, but based on the portion of the graph that is visible, we can 
determine the domain as  and the range as approximately 
In interval notation, the domain is [1973, 2008], and the range is about [180, 2010]. For the domain and the range, we 
approximate the smallest and largest values since they do not fall exactly on the grid lines. 

 TRY IT #6 Given Figure 12, identify the domain and range using interval notation. 

4 http://www.eia.gov/dnav/pet/hist/LeafHandler.ashx?n=PET&s=MCRFPAK2&f=A. 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.2 • Domain and Range     207

Figure 12 

 Q&A Can a function’s domain and range be the same? 

Yes. For example, the domain and range of the cube root function are both the set of all real numbers. 

Finding Domains and Ranges of the Toolkit Functions 
We will now return to our set of toolkit functions to determine the domain and range of each. 

Figure 13 For the constant function  the domain consists of all real numbers; there are no restrictions on the 
input. The only output value is the constant  so the range is the set  that contains this single element. In interval 
notation, this is written as  the interval that both begins and ends with 

Figure 14 For the identity function  there is no restriction on  Both the domain and range are the set of all 
real numbers. 

Figure 15 For the absolute value function  there is no restriction on  However, because absolute value is 



208     3 • Functions

defined as a distance from 0, the output can only be greater than or equal to 0. 

Figure 16 For the quadratic function  the domain is all real numbers since the horizontal extent of the graph 
is the whole real number line. Because the graph does not include any negative values for the range, the range is only 
nonnegative real numbers. 

Figure 17 For the cubic function  the domain is all real numbers because the horizontal extent of the graph is 
the whole real number line. The same applies to the vertical extent of the graph, so the domain and range include all real 
numbers. 

Figure 18 For the reciprocal function  we cannot divide by 0, so we must exclude 0 from the domain. Further, 
1 divided by any value can never be 0, so the range also will not include 0. In set-builder notation, we could also write 

 the set of all real numbers that are not zero. 

Figure 19 For the reciprocal squared function  we cannot divide by  so we must exclude  from the 
domain. There is also no  that can give an output of 0, so 0 is excluded from the range as well. Note that the output of 
this function is always positive due to the square in the denominator, so the range includes only positive numbers. 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.2 • Domain and Range     209

Figure 20 For the square root function  we cannot take the square root of a negative real number, so the 
domain must be 0 or greater. The range also excludes negative numbers because the square root of a positive number 
is defined to be positive, even though the square of the negative number  also gives us 

Figure 21 For the cube root function  the domain and range include all real numbers. Note that there is no 
problem taking a cube root, or any odd-integer root, of a negative number, and the resulting output is negative (it is an 
odd function). 

...
HOW TO 

Given the formula for a function, determine the domain and range. 

1. Exclude from the domain any input values that result in division by zero. 
2. Exclude from the domain any input values that have nonreal (or undefined) number outputs. 
3. Use the valid input values to determine the range of the output values. 
4. Look at the function graph and table values to confirm the actual function behavior. 

EXAMPLE 8 

Finding the Domain and Range Using Toolkit Functions 
Find the domain and range of 

Solution 
There are no restrictions on the domain, as any real number may be cubed and then subtracted from the result. 

The domain is ∞ ∞  and the range is also ∞ ∞

EXAMPLE 9 

Finding the Domain and Range 
Find the domain and range of 

Solution 
We cannot evaluate the function at  because division by zero is undefined. The domain is ∞ ∞



210     3 • Functions

Because the function is never zero, we exclude 0 from the range. The range is ∞ ∞

EXAMPLE 10 

Finding the Domain and Range 
Find the domain and range of 

Solution 
We cannot take the square root of a negative number, so the value inside the radical must be nonnegative. 

The domain of  is ∞
We then find the range. We know that  and the function value increases as  increases without any upper 
limit. We conclude that the range of  is ∞

Analysis 
Figure 22 represents the function 

Figure 22 

 TRY IT #7 Find the domain and range of 

Graphing Piecewise-Defined Functions 
Sometimes, we come across a function that requires more than one formula in order to obtain the given output. For 
example, in the toolkit functions, we introduced the absolute value function  With a domain of all real 
numbers and a range of values greater than or equal to 0, absolute value can be defined as the magnitude, or modulus, 
of a real number value regardless of sign. It is the distance from 0 on the number line. All of these definitions require the 
output to be greater than or equal to 0. 
If we input 0, or a positive value, the output is the same as the input. 

If we input a negative value, the output is the opposite of the input. 

Because this requires two different processes or pieces, the absolute value function is an example of a piecewise 
function. A piecewise function is a function in which more than one formula is used to define the output over different 
pieces of the domain. 
We use piecewise functions to describe situations in which a rule or relationship changes as the input value crosses 
certain “boundaries.” For example, we often encounter situations in business for which the cost per piece of a certain 
item is discounted once the number ordered exceeds a certain value. Tax brackets are another real-world example of 
piecewise functions. For example, consider a simple tax system in which incomes up to $10,000 are taxed at 10%, and 
any additional income is taxed at 20%. The tax on a total income  would be  if  and 

 if 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.2 • Domain and Range     211

Piecewise Function 

A piecewise function is a function in which more than one formula is used to define the output. Each formula has its 
own domain, and the domain of the function is the union of all these smaller domains. We notate this idea like this: 

In piecewise notation, the absolute value function is 

...
HOW TO 

Given a piecewise function, write the formula and identify the domain for each interval. 

1. Identify the intervals for which different rules apply. 
2. Determine formulas that describe how to calculate an output from an input in each interval. 
3. Use braces and if-statements to write the function. 

EXAMPLE 11 

Writing a Piecewise Function 
A museum charges $5 per person for a guided tour with a group of 1 to 9 people or a fixed $50 fee for a group of 10 or 
more people. Write a function relating the number of people,  to the cost,  Since one cannot have fractions of a 
person, this is really a discrete function. However, for this exercise we will treat it as a continuous function. 

Solution 
Two different formulas will be needed. For n-values under 10,  For values of  that are 10 or greater, 

Analysis 
The function is represented in Figure 23. The graph is a diagonal line from  to  and a constant after that. In 
this example, the two formulas agree at the meeting point where  but not all piecewise functions have this 
property. 

Figure 23 



212     3 • Functions

EXAMPLE 12 

Working with a Piecewise Function 
A cell phone company uses the function below to determine the cost,  in dollars for  gigabytes of data transfer. 

Find the cost of using 1.5 gigabytes of data and the cost of using 4 gigabytes of data. 

Solution 
To find the cost of using 1.5 gigabytes of data,  we first look to see which part of the domain our input falls in. 
Because 1.5 is less than 2, we use the first formula. 

To find the cost of using 4 gigabytes of data,  we see that our input of 4 is greater than 2, so we use the second 
formula. 

Analysis 
The function is represented in Figure 24. We can see where the function changes from a constant to a shifted and 
stretched identity at  We plot the graphs for the different formulas on a common set of axes, making sure each 
formula is applied on its proper domain. 

Figure 24 

...
HOW TO 

Given a piecewise function, sketch a graph. 

1. Indicate on the x-axis the boundaries defined by the intervals on each piece of the domain. 
2. For each piece of the domain, graph on that interval using the corresponding equation pertaining to that piece. 

Do not graph two functions over one interval because it would violate the criteria of a function. 

EXAMPLE 13 

Graphing a Piecewise Function 
Sketch a graph of the function. 

Solution 
Each of the component functions is from our library of toolkit functions, so we know their shapes. We can imagine 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.2 • Domain and Range     213

graphing each function and then limiting the graph to the indicated domain. At the endpoints of the domain, we draw 
open circles to indicate where the endpoint is not included because of a less-than or greater-than inequality; we draw a 
closed circle where the endpoint is included because of a less-than-or-equal-to or greater-than-or-equal-to inequality. 
Figure 25 shows the three components of the piecewise function graphed on separate coordinate systems. 

Figure 25 (a)  (b)  (c) 
Now that we have sketched each piece individually, we combine them in the same coordinate plane. See Figure 26. 

Figure 26 

Analysis 
Note that the graph does pass the vertical line test even at  and  because the points  and  are not 
part of the graph of the function, though  and  are. 

 TRY IT #8 Graph the following piecewise function. 

 Q&A Can more than one formula from a piecewise function be applied to a value in the domain? 

No. Each value corresponds to one equation in a piecewise formula. 

 MEDIA 

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with domain and range. 

Domain and Range of Square Root Functions (https://openstax.org/l/domainsqroot) 
Determining Domain and Range (https://openstax.org/l/determinedomain) 
Find Domain and Range Given the Graph (https://openstax.org/l/drgraph) 
Find Domain and Range Given a Table (https://openstax.org/l/drtable) 
Find Domain and Range Given Points on a Coordinate Plane (https://openstax.org/l/drcoordinate) 



214     3 • Functions

 3.2 SECTION EXERCISES 
Verbal 

1 . Why does the domain differ  2 . How do we determine the  3 . Explain why the domain of 
for different functions? domain of a function  is different from 

defined by an equation? the domain of 

4 . When describing sets of  5 . How do you graph a 
numbers using interval piecewise function? 
notation, when do you use a 
parenthesis and when do 
you use a bracket? 

Algebraic 

For the following exercises, find the domain of each function using interval notation. 

6 .  7 .  8 . 

9 .  10 .  11 . 

12 .  13 .  14 . 

15 .  16 .  17 . 

18 .  19 .  20 . 

21 .  22 .  23 . 

24 .  25 .  26 . Find the domain of the 
function 

 by: 
ⓐ using algebra. 
ⓑ graphing the function 
in the radicand and 
determining intervals on 
the x-axis for which the 
radicand is nonnegative. 

Graphical 

For the following exercises, write the domain and range of each function using interval notation. 
27 . 28 . 29 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.2 • Domain and Range     215

30 . 31 . 32 . 

33 . 34 . 35 . 

36 . 37 . 

For the following exercises, sketch a graph of the piecewise function. Write the domain in interval notation. 

38 .  39. 40 . 

41 . 42 .  43 . 

44 .  45. 

Numeric 

For the following exercises, given each function  evaluate  and 

46 .  47.  48 . 



216     3 • Functions

For the following exercises, given each function  evaluate  and 

49 .  50 .  51 . 

For the following exercises, write the domain for the piecewise function in interval notation. 

52 .  53 . 

54 . 

Technology 

55 . Graph  on the viewing window 56 . Graph  on the viewing window 
 and  Determine the and  Determine the corresponding 

corresponding range for the viewing window. range for the viewing window. Show the graphs. 
Show the graphs. 

Extension 

57 . Suppose the range of a  58 . Create a function in which  59 . Create a function in which 
function  is the range is all the domain is 
What is the range of nonnegative real numbers. 

Real-World Applications 

60 . The height  of a projectile 61 . The cost in dollars of 
is a function of the time  it making  items is given by 
is in the air. The height in the function 
feet for  seconds is given 
by the function ⓐ The fixed cost is 

 What determined when zero 
is the domain of the items are produced. Find 
function? What does the the fixed cost for this item. 
domain mean in the ⓑ What is the cost of 
context of the problem? making 25 items? 

ⓒ Suppose the maximum 
cost allowed is $1500. 
What are the domain and 
range of the cost function, 

3.3 Rates of Change and Behavior of Graphs 
Learning Objectives 
In this section, you will: 

Find the average rate of change of a function. 
Use a graph to determine where a function is increasing, decreasing, or constant. 
Use a graph to locate local maxima and local minima. 
Use a graph to locate the absolute maximum and absolute minimum. 

Gasoline costs have experienced some wild fluctuations over the last several decades. Table 15  lists the average cost, in 
dollars, of a gallon of gasoline for the years 2005–2012. The cost of gasoline can be considered as a function of year. 

5 http://www.eia.gov/totalenergy/data/annual/showtext.cfm?t=ptb0524. Accessed 3/5/2014. 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.3 • Rates of Change and Behavior of Graphs     217

2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 

2.31 2.62 2.84 3.30 2.41 2.84 3.58 3.68 

Table 1 

If we were interested only in how the gasoline prices changed between 2005 and 2012, we could compute that the cost 
per gallon had increased from $2.31 to $3.68, an increase of $1.37. While this is interesting, it might be more useful to 
look at how much the price changed per year. In this section, we will investigate changes such as these. 

Finding the Average Rate of Change of a Function 
The price change per year is a rate of change because it describes how an output quantity changes relative to the 
change in the input quantity. We can see that the price of gasoline in Table 1 did not change by the same amount each 
year, so the rate of change was not constant. If we use only the beginning and ending data, we would be finding the 
average rate of change over the specified period of time. To find the average rate of change, we divide the change in 
the output value by the change in the input value. 

The Greek letter  (delta) signifies the change in a quantity; we read the ratio as “delta-y over delta-x” or “the change in 
divided by the change in ” Occasionally we write  instead of  which still represents the change in the function’s 
output value resulting from a change to its input value. It does not mean we are changing the function into some other 
function. 
In our example, the gasoline price increased by $1.37 from 2005 to 2012. Over 7 years, the average rate of change was 

On average, the price of gas increased by about 19.6¢ each year. 
Other examples of rates of change include: 

• A population of rats increasing by 40 rats per week 
• A car traveling 68 miles per hour (distance traveled changes by 68 miles each hour as time passes) 
• A car driving 27 miles per gallon (distance traveled changes by 27 miles for each gallon) 
• The current through an electrical circuit increasing by 0.125 amperes for every volt of increased voltage 
• The amount of money in a college account decreasing by $4,000 per quarter 

Rate of Change 

A rate of change describes how an output quantity changes relative to the change in the input quantity. The units on 
a rate of change are “output units per input units.” 

The average rate of change between two input values is the total change of the function values (output values) 
divided by the change in the input values. 



218     3 • Functions

...
HOW TO 

Given the value of a function at different points, calculate the average rate of change of a function for the 
interval between two values  and 

1. Calculate the difference 
2. Calculate the difference 
3. Find the ratio 

EXAMPLE 1 

Computing an Average Rate of Change 
Using the data in Table 1, find the average rate of change of the price of gasoline between 2007 and 2009. 

Solution 
In 2007, the price of gasoline was $2.84. In 2009, the cost was $2.41. The average rate of change is 

Analysis 
Note that a decrease is expressed by a negative change or “negative increase.” A rate of change is negative when the 
output decreases as the input increases or when the output increases as the input decreases. 

 TRY IT #1 Using the data in Table 1, find the average rate of change between 2005 and 2010. 

EXAMPLE 2 

Computing Average Rate of Change from a Graph 
Given the function  shown in Figure 1, find the average rate of change on the interval 

Figure 1 

Solution 
At  Figure 2 shows  At  the graph shows 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.3 • Rates of Change and Behavior of Graphs     219

Figure 2 
The horizontal change  is shown by the red arrow, and the vertical change  is shown by the turquoise 
arrow. The average rate of change is shown by the slope of the orange line segment. The output changes by –3 while the 
input changes by 3, giving an average rate of change of 

Analysis 
Note that the order we choose is very important. If, for example, we use  we will not get the correct answer. 
Decide which point will be 1 and which point will be 2, and keep the coordinates fixed as  and 

EXAMPLE 3 

Computing Average Rate of Change from a Table 
After picking up a friend who lives 10 miles away and leaving on a trip, Anna records her distance from home over time. 
The values are shown in Table 2. Find her average speed over the first 6 hours. 

t (hours) 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 

D(t) (miles) 10 55 90 153 214 240 292 300 

Table 2 

Solution 
Here, the average speed is the average rate of change. She traveled 282 miles in 6 hours. 

The average speed is 47 miles per hour. 

Analysis 
Because the speed is not constant, the average speed depends on the interval chosen. For the interval [2,3], the average 
speed is 63 miles per hour. 

EXAMPLE 4 

Computing Average Rate of Change for a Function Expressed as a Formula 
Compute the average rate of change of  on the interval 

Solution 
We can start by computing the function values at each endpoint of the interval. 



220     3 • Functions

Now we compute the average rate of change. 

 TRY IT #2 Find the average rate of change of  on the interval 

EXAMPLE 5 

Finding the Average Rate of Change of a Force 
The electrostatic force  measured in newtons, between two charged particles can be related to the distance between 
the particles  in centimeters, by the formula  Find the average rate of change of force if the distance 
between the particles is increased from 2 cm to 6 cm. 

Solution 
We are computing the average rate of change of  on the interval 

The average rate of change is  newton per centimeter. 

EXAMPLE 6 

Finding an Average Rate of Change as an Expression 
Find the average rate of change of  on the interval  The answer will be an expression involving 
in simplest form. 

Solution 
We use the average rate of change formula. 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.3 • Rates of Change and Behavior of Graphs     221

This result tells us the average rate of change in terms of  between  and any other point  For example, on the 
interval  the average rate of change would be 

 TRY IT #3 Find the average rate of change of  on the interval  in simplest forms in 
terms of 

Using a Graph to Determine Where a Function is Increasing, Decreasing, or 
Constant 
As part of exploring how functions change, we can identify intervals over which the function is changing in specific ways. 
We say that a function is increasing on an interval if the function values increase as the input values increase within that 
interval. Similarly, a function is decreasing on an interval if the function values decrease as the input values increase over 
that interval. The average rate of change of an increasing function is positive, and the average rate of change of a 
decreasing function is negative. Figure 3 shows examples of increasing and decreasing intervals on a function. 

​
Figure 3 The function  is increasing on ∞ ​ ∞  and is decreasing on 

While some functions are increasing (or decreasing) over their entire domain, many others are not. A value of the input 
where a function changes from increasing to decreasing (as we go from left to right, that is, as the input variable 
increases) is the location of a local maximum. The function value at that point is the local maximum. If a function has 
more than one, we say it has local maxima. Similarly, a value of the input where a function changes from decreasing to 
increasing as the input variable increases is the location of a local minimum. The function value at that point is the local 
minimum. The plural form is “local minima.” Together, local maxima and minima are called local extrema, or local 
extreme values, of the function. (The singular form is “extremum.”) Often, the term local is replaced by the term relative. 
In this text, we will use the term local. 
Clearly, a function is neither increasing nor decreasing on an interval where it is constant. A function is also neither 
increasing nor decreasing at extrema. Note that we have to speak of local extrema, because any given local extremum as 
defined here is not necessarily the highest maximum or lowest minimum in the function’s entire domain. 



222     3 • Functions

For the function whose graph is shown in Figure 4, the local maximum is 16, and it occurs at  The local minimum 
is  and it occurs at 

Figure 4 
To locate the local maxima and minima from a graph, we need to observe the graph to determine where the graph 
attains its highest and lowest points, respectively, within an open interval. Like the summit of a roller coaster, the graph 
of a function is higher at a local maximum than at nearby points on both sides. The graph will also be lower at a local 
minimum than at neighboring points. Figure 5 illustrates these ideas for a local maximum. 

Figure 5 Definition of a local maximum 
These observations lead us to a formal definition of local extrema. 

Local Minima and Local Maxima 

A function  is an increasing function on an open interval if  for any two input values  and  in the 
given interval where 

A function  is a decreasing function on an open interval if  for any two input values  and  in the given 
interval where 

A function  has a local maximum at  if there exists an interval  with  such that, for any  in the 
interval   Likewise,  has a local minimum at  if there exists an interval  with 
such that, for any  in the interval  

Access for free at openstax.org



3.3 • Rates of Change and Behavior of Graphs     223

EXAMPLE 7 

Finding Increasing and Decreasing Intervals on a Graph 
Given the function  in Figure 6, identify the intervals on which the function appears to be increasing. 

Figure 6 

Solution 
We see that the function is not constant on any interval. The function is increasing where it slants upward as we move to 
the right and decreasing where it slants downward as we move to the right. The function appears to be increasing from 

 to  and from  on. 

In interval notation, we would say the function appears to be increasing on the interval (1,3) and the interval ∞
Analysis 

Notice in this example that we used open intervals (intervals that do not include the endpoints), because the function is 
neither increasing nor decreasing at  ,  , and  . These points are the local extrema (two minima and a 
maximum). 

EXAMPLE 8 

Finding Local Extrema from a Graph 
Graph the function  Then use the graph to estimate the local extrema of the function and to determine 
the intervals on which the function is increasing. 

Solution 
Using technology, we find that the graph of the function looks like that in Figure 7. It appears there is a low point, or 
local minimum, between  and  and a mirror-image high point, or local maximum, somewhere between 

 and 



224     3 • Functions

Figure 7 

Analysis 
Most graphing calculators and graphing utilities can estimate the location of maxima and minima. Figure 8 provides 
screen images from two different technologies, showing the estimate for the local maximum and minimum. 

Figure 8 

Based on these estimates, the function is increasing on the interval ∞  and ∞  Notice that, while we 
expect the extrema to be symmetric, the two different technologies agree only up to four decimals due to the differing 
approximation algorithms used by each. (The exact location of the extrema is at  but determining this requires 
calculus.) 

 TRY IT #4 Graph the function  to estimate the local extrema of the function. 
Use these to determine the intervals on which the function is increasing and decreasing. 

EXAMPLE 9 

Finding Local Maxima and Minima from a Graph 
For the function  whose graph is shown in Figure 9, find all local maxima and minima. 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.3 • Rates of Change and Behavior of Graphs     225

Figure 9 

Solution 
Observe the graph of  The graph attains a local maximum at  because it is the highest point in an open interval 
around  The local maximum is the  -coordinate at  which is 
The graph attains a local minimum at  because it is the lowest point in an open interval around  The local 
minimum is the y-coordinate at  which is 

Analyzing the Toolkit Functions for Increasing or Decreasing Intervals 
We will now return to our toolkit functions and discuss their graphical behavior in Figure 10, Figure 11, and Figure 12. 

Figure 10 



226     3 • Functions

Figure 11 

Figure 12 

Use A Graph to Locate the Absolute Maximum and Absolute Minimum 
There is a difference between locating the highest and lowest points on a graph in a region around an open interval 
(locally) and locating the highest and lowest points on the graph for the entire domain. The  coordinates (output) at the 
highest and lowest points are called the absolute maximum and absolute minimum, respectively. 
To locate absolute maxima and minima from a graph, we need to observe the graph to determine where the graph 
attains it highest and lowest points on the domain of the function. See Figure 13. 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.3 • Rates of Change and Behavior of Graphs     227

Figure 13 

Not every function has an absolute maximum or minimum value. The toolkit function  is one such function. 

Absolute Maxima and Minima 

The absolute maximum of  at  is  where  for all  in the domain of 

The absolute minimum of  at  is  where  for all  in the domain of 

EXAMPLE 10 

Finding Absolute Maxima and Minima from a Graph 
For the function  shown in Figure 14, find all absolute maxima and minima. 

Figure 14 

Solution 
Observe the graph of  The graph attains an absolute maximum in two locations,  and  because at these 
locations, the graph attains its highest point on the domain of the function. The absolute maximum is the y-coordinate 
at  and  which is 
The graph attains an absolute minimum at  because it is the lowest point on the domain of the function’s graph. 
The absolute minimum is the y-coordinate at  which is 

 MEDIA 

Access this online resource for additional instruction and practice with rates of change. 



228     3 • Functions

Average Rate of Change (https://openstax.org/l/aroc) 

 3.3 SECTION EXERCISES 
Verbal 

1 . Can the average rate of  2 . If a function  is increasing  3 . How are the absolute 
change of a function be on  and decreasing on maximum and minimum 
constant?  then what can be said similar to and different from 

about the local extremum of the local extrema? 
 on 

4 . How does the graph of the 
absolute value function 
compare to the graph of the 
quadratic function, 
in terms of increasing and 
decreasing intervals? 

Algebraic 

For the following exercises, find the average rate of change of each function on the interval specified for real numbers 
or  in simplest form. 

5 .  on  6 .  on  7 .  on 

8 .  on  9 .  on  10 .  on 

11 .  on  12 .  on  13 .  on 

14 .  on  15 . Find  given 
 on 

Graphical 

For the following exercises, consider the graph of  shown in Figure 15. 

Figure 15 
16 . Estimate the average rate  17 . Estimate the average rate 

of change from  to of change from  to 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.3 • Rates of Change and Behavior of Graphs     229

For the following exercises, use the graph of each function to estimate the intervals on which the function is increasing 
or decreasing. 
18 . 19 . 20 . 

21 . 

For the following exercises, consider the graph shown in Figure 16. 

Figure 16 
22 . Estimate the intervals  23 . Estimate the point(s) at 

where the function is which the graph of  has a 
increasing or decreasing. local maximum or a local 

minimum. 



230     3 • Functions

For the following exercises, consider the graph in Figure 17. 

Figure 17 
24 . If the complete graph of  25 . If the complete graph of 

the function is shown, the function is shown, 
estimate the intervals estimate the absolute 
where the function is maximum and absolute 
increasing or decreasing. minimum. 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.3 • Rates of Change and Behavior of Graphs     231

Numeric 

26 . Table 3 gives the annual 27 . Table 4 gives the population of a town (in 
sales (in millions of dollars) thousands) from 2000 to 2008. What was the 
of a product from 1998 to average rate of change of population (a) between 
2006. What was the 2002 and 2004, and (b) between 2002 and 2006? 
average rate of change of 
annual sales (a) between 

Year Population 
2001 and 2002, and (b) (thousands) 
between 2001 and 2004? 

2000 87 
Sales 

Year (millions of 2001 84 
dollars) 

2002 83 
1998 201 

2003 80 
1999 219 

2004 77 
2000 233 

2005 76 
2001 243 

2006 78 
2002 249 

2007 81 
2003 251 

2008 85 
2004 249 

Table 4 
2005 243 

2006 233 

Table 3 

For the following exercises, find the average rate of change of each function on the interval specified. 

28 .  on  29 .  on  30 .  on 

31 .  on  32 .  on  33 .  on 

34 .  on 

Technology 

For the following exercises, use a graphing utility to estimate the local extrema of each function and to estimate the 
intervals on which the function is increasing and decreasing. 

35 .  36 . 

37 .  38 . 

39 .  40 . 



232     3 • Functions

Extension 

41 . The graph of the function  is shown in Figure 18.  42 . Let  Find a 
number  such that the 
average rate of change of 
the function  on the 
interval  is 

Figure 18 
Based on the calculator screen shot, the point 

 is which of the following? 
ⓐ a relative (local) maximum of the function 
ⓑ the vertex of the function 
ⓒ the absolute maximum of the function 
ⓓ a zero of the function 

43 . Let  . Find the 
number  such that the 
average rate of change of 

 on the interval  is 

Real-World Applications 

44 . At the start of a trip, the  45 . A driver of a car stopped at  46 . Near the surface of the 
odometer on a car read a gas station to fill up their moon, the distance that an 
21,395. At the end of the gas tank. They looked at object falls is a function of 
trip, 13.5 hours later, the their watch, and the time time. It is given by 
odometer read 22,125. read exactly 3:40 p.m. At  where  is 
Assume the scale on the this time, they started in seconds and  is in 
odometer is in miles. What pumping gas into the tank. feet. If an object is dropped 
is the average speed the At exactly 3:44, the tank from a certain height, find 
car traveled during this was full and the driver the average velocity of the 
trip? noticed that they had object from  to 

pumped 10.7 gallons. What 
is the average rate of flow 
of the gasoline into the gas 
tank? 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.4 • Composition of Functions     233

47 . The graph in Figure 19 illustrates the decay of a 
radioactive substance over  days. 

Figure 19 
Use the graph to estimate the average decay rate 
from  to 

3.4 Composition of Functions 
Learning Objectives 
In this section, you will: 

Combine functions using algebraic operations. 
Create a new function by composition of functions. 
Evaluate composite functions. 
Find the domain of a composite function. 
Decompose a composite function into its component functions. 

Suppose we want to calculate how much it costs to heat a house on a particular day of the year. The cost to heat a house 
will depend on the average daily temperature, and in turn, the average daily temperature depends on the particular day 
of the year. Notice how we have just defined two relationships: The cost depends on the temperature, and the 
temperature depends on the day. 
Using descriptive variables, we can notate these two functions. The function  gives the cost  of heating a house 
for a given average daily temperature in  degrees Celsius. The function  gives the average daily temperature on 
day  of the year. For any given day,  means that the cost depends on the temperature, which in turns 
depends on the day of the year. Thus, we can evaluate the cost function at the temperature  For example, we could 
evaluate  to determine the average daily temperature on the 5th day of the year. Then, we could evaluate the cost 
function at that temperature. We would write 

By combining these two relationships into one function, we have performed function composition, which is the focus of 
this section. 

Combining Functions Using Algebraic Operations 
Function composition is only one way to combine existing functions. Another way is to carry out the usual algebraic 
operations on functions, such as addition, subtraction, multiplication and division. We do this by performing the 
operations with the function outputs, defining the result as the output of our new function. 
Suppose we need to add two columns of numbers that represent a husband and wife’s separate annual incomes over a 
period of years, with the result being their total household income. We want to do this for every year, adding only that 
year’s incomes and then collecting all the data in a new column. If  is the wife’s income and  is the husband’s 



234     3 • Functions

income in year  and we want  to represent the total income, then we can define a new function. 

If this holds true for every year, then we can focus on the relation between the functions without reference to a year and 
write 

Just as for this sum of two functions, we can define difference, product, and ratio functions for any pair of functions that 
have the same kinds of inputs (not necessarily numbers) and also the same kinds of outputs (which do have to be 
numbers so that the usual operations of algebra can apply to them, and which also must have the same units or no units 
when we add and subtract). In this way, we can think of adding, subtracting, multiplying, and dividing functions. 

For two functions  and  with real number outputs, we define new functions  and  by the 
relations 

EXAMPLE 1 

Performing Algebraic Operations on Functions 
Find and simplify the functions  and  given  and  Are they the same 
function? 

Solution 
Begin by writing the general form, and then substitute the given functions. 

No, the functions are not the same. 

Note: For  the condition  is necessary because when  the denominator is equal to 0, which makes 
the function undefined. 

 TRY IT #1 Find and simplify the functions  and 

Are they the same function? 

Create a Function by Composition of Functions 
Performing algebraic operations on functions combines them into a new function, but we can also create functions by 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.4 • Composition of Functions     235

composing functions. When we wanted to compute a heating cost from a day of the year, we created a new function that 
takes a day as input and yields a cost as output. The process of combining functions so that the output of one function 
becomes the input of another is known as a composition of functions. The resulting function is known as a composite 
function. We represent this combination by the following notation: 

We read the left-hand side as  composed with  at  and the right-hand side as  of  of  The two sides of the 
equation have the same mathematical meaning and are equal. The open circle symbol  is called the composition 
operator. We use this operator mainly when we wish to emphasize the relationship between the functions themselves 
without referring to any particular input value. Composition is a binary operation that takes two functions and forms a 
new function, much as addition or multiplication takes two numbers and gives a new number. However, it is important 
not to confuse function composition with multiplication because, as we learned above, in most cases 
It is also important to understand the order of operations in evaluating a composite function. We follow the usual 
convention with parentheses by starting with the innermost parentheses first, and then working to the outside. In the 
equation above, the function  takes the input  first and yields an output  Then the function  takes  as an 
input and yields an output 

In general,  and  are different functions. In other words, in many cases  for all  We will also 
see that sometimes two functions can be composed only in one specific order. 

For example, if  and  then 

but 

These expressions are not equal for all values of  so the two functions are not equal. It is irrelevant that the 
expressions happen to be equal for the single input value 

Note that the range of the inside function (the first function to be evaluated) needs to be within the domain of the 
outside function. Less formally, the composition has to make sense in terms of inputs and outputs. 

Composition of Functions 

When the output of one function is used as the input of another, we call the entire operation a composition of 
functions. For any input  and functions  and  this action defines a composite function, which we write as 
such that 

The domain of the composite function  is all  such that  is in the domain of  and  is in the domain of 

It is important to realize that the product of functions  is not the same as the function composition 
because, in general, 



236     3 • Functions

EXAMPLE 2 

Determining whether Composition of Functions is Commutative 
Using the functions provided, find  and  Determine whether the composition of the functions is 
commutative. 

Solution 
Let’s begin by substituting  into 

Now we can substitute  into 

We find that  so the operation of function composition is not commutative. 

EXAMPLE 3 

Interpreting Composite Functions 
The function  gives the number of calories burned completing  sit-ups, and  gives the number of sit-ups a person 
can complete in  minutes. Interpret 

Solution 
The inside expression in the composition is  Because the input to the s-function is time,  represents 3 minutes, 
and  is the number of sit-ups completed in 3 minutes. 
Using  as the input to the function  gives us the number of calories burned during the number of sit-ups that can 
be completed in 3 minutes, or simply the number of calories burned in 3 minutes (by doing sit-ups). 

EXAMPLE 4 

Investigating the Order of Function Composition 
Suppose  gives miles that can be driven in  hours and  gives the gallons of gas used in driving  miles. Which of 
these expressions is meaningful:  or 

Solution 
The function  is a function whose output is the number of miles driven corresponding to the number of hours 
driven. 

The function  is a function whose output is the number of gallons used corresponding to the number of miles 
driven. This means: 

The expression  takes miles as the input and a number of gallons as the output. The function  requires a number 
of hours as the input. Trying to input a number of gallons does not make sense. The expression  is meaningless. 
The expression  takes hours as input and a number of miles driven as the output. The function  requires a 
number of miles as the input. Using  (miles driven) as an input value for  where gallons of gas depends on miles 
driven, does make sense. The expression  makes sense, and will yield the number of gallons of gas used, 
driving a certain number of miles,  in  hours. 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.4 • Composition of Functions     237

 Q&A Are there any situations where  and  would both be meaningful or useful expressions? 

Yes. For many pure mathematical functions, both compositions make sense, even though they usually 
produce different new functions. In real-world problems, functions whose inputs and outputs have the 
same units also may give compositions that are meaningful in either order. 

 TRY IT #2 The gravitational force on a planet a distance r from the sun is given by the function  The 
acceleration of a planet subjected to any force  is given by the function  Form a meaningful 
composition of these two functions, and explain what it means. 

Evaluating Composite Functions 
Once we compose a new function from two existing functions, we need to be able to evaluate it for any input in its 
domain. We will do this with specific numerical inputs for functions expressed as tables, graphs, and formulas and with 
variables as inputs to functions expressed as formulas. In each case, we evaluate the inner function using the starting 
input and then use the inner function’s output as the input for the outer function. 

Evaluating Composite Functions Using Tables 
When working with functions given as tables, we read input and output values from the table entries and always work 
from the inside to the outside. We evaluate the inside function first and then use the output of the inside function as the 
input to the outside function. 

EXAMPLE 5 

Using a Table to Evaluate a Composite Function 
Using Table 1, evaluate  and 

1 6 3 

2 8 5 

3 3 2 

4 1 7 

Table 1 

Solution 
To evaluate  we start from the inside with the input value 3. We then evaluate the inside expression  using 
the table that defines the function   We can then use that result as the input to the function  so  is 
replaced by 2 and we get  Then, using the table that defines the function  we find that 

To evaluate  we first evaluate the inside expression  using the first table:  Then, using the table for 
   we can evaluate 

Table 2 shows the composite functions  and  as tables. 



238     3 • Functions

3 2 8 3 2 

Table 2 

 TRY IT #3 Using Table 1, evaluate  and 

Evaluating Composite Functions Using Graphs 
When we are given individual functions as graphs, the procedure for evaluating composite functions is similar to the 
process we use for evaluating tables. We read the input and output values, but this time, from the  and  axes of the 
graphs. 

...
HOW TO 

Given a composite function and graphs of its individual functions, evaluate it using the information provided 
by the graphs. 

1. Locate the given input to the inner function on the  axis of its graph. 
2. Read off the output of the inner function from the  axis of its graph. 
3. Locate the inner function output on the  axis of the graph of the outer function. 
4. Read the output of the outer function from the  axis of its graph. This is the output of the composite function. 

EXAMPLE 6 

Using a Graph to Evaluate a Composite Function 
Using Figure 1, evaluate 

Figure 1 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.4 • Composition of Functions     239

Solution 
To evaluate  we start with the inside evaluation. See Figure 2. 

Figure 2 
We evaluate  using the graph of  finding the input of 1 on the  axis and finding the output value of the graph 
at that input. Here,  We use this value as the input to the function 

We can then evaluate the composite function by looking to the graph of  finding the input of 3 on the  axis and 
reading the output value of the graph at this input. Here,  so 

Analysis 
Figure 3 shows how we can mark the graphs with arrows to trace the path from the input value to the output value. 

Figure 3 

 TRY IT #4 Using Figure 1, evaluate 

Evaluating Composite Functions Using Formulas 
When evaluating a composite function where we have either created or been given formulas, the rule of working from 
the inside out remains the same. The input value to the outer function will be the output of the inner function, which 
may be a numerical value, a variable name, or a more complicated expression. 
While we can compose the functions for each individual input value, it is sometimes helpful to find a single formula that 



240     3 • Functions

will calculate the result of a composition  To do this, we will extend our idea of function evaluation. Recall that, 
when we evaluate a function like  we substitute the value inside the parentheses into the formula wherever 
we see the input variable. 

...
HOW TO 

Given a formula for a composite function, evaluate the function. 

1. Evaluate the inside function using the input value or variable provided. 
2. Use the resulting output as the input to the outside function. 

EXAMPLE 7 

Evaluating a Composition of Functions Expressed as Formulas with a Numerical Input 
Given  and  evaluate 

Solution 
Because the inside expression is  we start by evaluating  at 1. 

Then  so we evaluate  at an input of 5. 

Analysis 
It makes no difference what the input variables  and  were called in this problem because we evaluated for specific 
numerical values. 

 TRY IT #5 Given  and  evaluate 

ⓐ   ⓑ  

Finding the Domain of a Composite Function 
As we discussed previously, the domain of a composite function such as  is dependent on the domain of  and the 
domain of  It is important to know when we can apply a composite function and when we cannot, that is, to know the 
domain of a function such as  Let us assume we know the domains of the functions  and  separately. If we write 
the composite function for an input  as  we can see right away that  must be a member of the domain of  in 
order for the expression to be meaningful, because otherwise we cannot complete the inner function evaluation. 
However, we also see that  must be a member of the domain of  otherwise the second function evaluation in 

 cannot be completed, and the expression is still undefined. Thus the domain of  consists of only those 
inputs in the domain of  that produce outputs from  belonging to the domain of  Note that the domain of 
composed with  is the set of all  such that  is in the domain of  and  is in the domain of 

Domain of a Composite Function 

The domain of a composite function  is the set of those inputs  in the domain of  for which  is in the 
domain of 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.4 • Composition of Functions     241

...
HOW TO 

Given a function composition  determine its domain. 

1. Find the domain of 
2. Find the domain of 
3. Find those inputs  in the domain of  for which  is in the domain of  That is, exclude those inputs  from 

the domain of  for which  is not in the domain of  The resulting set is the domain of 

EXAMPLE 8 

Finding the Domain of a Composite Function 
Find the domain of 

Solution 
The domain of  consists of all real numbers except  since that input value would cause us to divide by 0. 
Likewise, the domain of  consists of all real numbers except 1. So we need to exclude from the domain of  that 
value of  for which 

So the domain of  is the set of all real numbers except  and  This means that 

We can write this in interval notation as 

∞ ∞

EXAMPLE 9 

Finding the Domain of a Composite Function Involving Radicals 
Find the domain of 

Solution 
Because we cannot take the square root of a negative number, the domain of  is ∞  Now we check the domain of 
the composite function 

For  since the radicand of a square root must be positive. Since square roots 
are positive,  or,  which gives a domain of  . 

Analysis 
This example shows that knowledge of the range of functions (specifically the inner function) can also be helpful in 
finding the domain of a composite function. It also shows that the domain of  can contain values that are not in the 



242     3 • Functions

domain of  though they must be in the domain of 

 TRY IT #6 Find the domain of 

Decomposing a Composite Function into its Component Functions 
In some cases, it is necessary to decompose a complicated function. In other words, we can write it as a composition of 
two simpler functions. There may be more than one way to decompose a composite function, so we may choose the 
decomposition that appears to be most expedient. 

EXAMPLE 10 

Decomposing a Function 
Write  as the composition of two functions. 

Solution 
We are looking for two functions,  and  so  To do this, we look for a function inside a function in the 
formula for  As one possibility, we might notice that the expression  is the inside of the square root. We could 
then decompose the function as 

We can check our answer by recomposing the functions. 

 TRY IT #7 Write  as the composition of two functions. 

 MEDIA 

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with composite functions. 

Composite Functions (https://openstax.org/l/compfunction) 
Composite Function Notation Application (https://openstax.org/l/compfuncnot) 
Composite Functions Using Graphs (https://openstax.org/l/compfuncgraph) 
Decompose Functions (https://openstax.org/l/decompfunction) 
Composite Function Values (https://openstax.org/l/compfuncvalue) 

 3.4 SECTION EXERCISES 
Verbal 

1 . How does one find the  2 . What is the composition of  3 . If the order is reversed 
domain of the quotient of two functions, when composing two 
two functions, functions, can the result 

ever be the same as the 
answer in the original order 
of the composition? If yes, 
give an example. If no, 
explain why not. 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.4 • Composition of Functions     243

4 . How do you find the domain 
for the composition of two 
functions, 

Algebraic 

For the following exercises, determine the domain for each function in interval notation. 

5 . Given  and  find  6 . Given  and  find 
 and  and 

7 . Given  and  find  8 . Given  and  find 
 and  and 

9 . Given  and  find  10 . Given  and  find 
 and 

11 . For the following exercise, find the indicated 
function given  and 
ⓐ  ⓑ  ⓒ  
ⓓ  ⓔ  

For the following exercises, use each pair of functions to find  and  Simplify your answers. 

12 .  13 .  14 . 

15 .  16 .  17 . 

For the following exercises, use each set of functions to find  Simplify your answers. 

18 .  19 .   20 . Given  and 
 and and  find the 

following: 
ⓐ  
ⓑ the domain of 
in interval notation 
ⓒ  
ⓓ the domain of 

ⓔ  

21 . Given  and  22 . Given the functions  23 . Given functions 
 find the 

and  state 
following: find the following: the domain of each of the 
ⓐ  ⓐ  ⓑ  following functions using 
ⓑ  the domain of interval notation: 

 in interval ⓑ  
notation ⓐ  

ⓒ  

24 . Given functions  25 . For  and 

and  state  write the 
the domain of each of the domain of  in 
following functions using interval notation. 
interval notation. 
ⓐ  ⓑ  

ⓒ  



244     3 • Functions

For the following exercises, find functions  and  so the given function can be expressed as 

26 .  27 .  28 . 

29 .  30 .  31 . 

32 .  33 .  34 . 

35 .  36 .  37 . 

38 .  39 .  40 . 

41 . 

Graphical 

For the following exercises, use the graphs of  shown in Figure 4, and  shown in Figure 5, to evaluate the expressions. 

Figure 4 

Figure 5 
42 .  43 .  44 . 
45 .  46 .  47 . 
48 .  49 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.4 • Composition of Functions     245

For the following exercises, use graphs of  shown in Figure 6,  shown in Figure 7, and  shown in Figure 8, 
to evaluate the expressions. 

Figure 6 

Figure 7 

Figure 8 
50 .  51 .  52 . 
53 .  54 .  55 . 
56 .  57 . 

Numeric 

For the following exercises, use the function values for  shown in Table 3 to evaluate each expression. 

0 7 9 

1 6 5 

Table 3 



246     3 • Functions

2 5 6 

3 8 2 

4 4 1 

5 0 8 

6 2 7 

7 1 3 

8 9 4 

9 3 0 

Table 3 

58 .  59 .  60 . 
61 .  62 .  63 . 
64 .  65 . 

For the following exercises, use the function values for  shown in Table 4 to evaluate the expressions. 

11 

9 

7 0 

0 5 1 

1 3 0 

2 1 

3 

Table 4 

66 .  67 .  68 . 
69 .  70 .  71 . 

For the following exercises, use each pair of functions to find  and 

72 .  73 .  74 . 

75 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.4 • Composition of Functions     247

For the following exercises, use the functions  and  to evaluate or find the composite 
function as indicated. 
76 .  77 .  78 . 
79 . 

Extensions 

For the following exercises, use  and 

80 . Find  and  81 . Find  and  82 . What is the domain of 
 Compare the 

two answers. 

83 . What is the domain of  84 . Let 
ⓐ Find 
ⓑ Is  for any 
function  the same result 
as the answer to part (a) 
for any function? Explain. 

For the following exercises, let   and 
85 . True or False:  86 . True or False: 

For the following exercises, find the composition when  for all  and 

87 .  88 .  89 . 

Real-World Applications 

90 . The function  gives the  91 . The function  gives the  92 . A store offers customers a 
number of items that will pain level on a scale of 0 to 30% discount on the price 
be demanded when the 10 experienced by a  of selected items. Then, 
price is  The production patient with  milligrams the store takes off an 
cost  is the cost of of a pain-reducing drug in additional 15% at the cash 
producing  items. To her system. The milligrams register. Write a price 
determine the cost of of the drug in the patient’s function  that 
production when the price system after  minutes is computes the final price of 
is $6, you would do which modeled by  Which of the item in terms of the 
of the following? the following would you do original price  (Hint: Use 
ⓐ Evaluate in order to determine function composition to 
ⓑ Evaluate when the patient will be at find your answer.) 

ⓒ Solve a pain level of 4? 

ⓓ Solve ⓐ Evaluate 
ⓑ Evaluate 
ⓒ Solve 
ⓓ Solve 



248     3 • Functions

93 . A rain drop hitting a lake  94 . A forest fire leaves behind  95 . Use the function you found 
makes a circular ripple. If an area of grass burned in in the previous exercise to 
the radius, in inches, grows an expanding circular find the total area burned 
as a function of time in pattern. If the radius of the after 5 minutes. 
minutes according to circle of burning grass is 

 find the increasing with time 
area of the ripple as a according to the formula 
function of time. Find the  express the 
area of the ripple at area burned as a function 

of time,  (minutes). 
96 . The radius  in inches, of a spherical balloon is  97 . The number of bacteria in a refrigerated food 

related to the volume,  by  Air is product is given by 
 where  is the temperature of the 

pumped into the balloon, so the volume after food. When the food is removed from the 
seconds is given by refrigerator, the temperature is given by 
ⓐ Find the composite function  where  is the time in hours. 
ⓑ Find the exact time when the radius reaches 10 ⓐ Find the composite function 
inches. ⓑ Find the time (round to two decimal places) 

when the bacteria count reaches 6752. 

3.5 Transformation of Functions 
Learning Objectives 
In this section, you will: 

Graph functions using vertical and horizontal shifts. 
Graph functions using reflections about the x-axis and the y-axis. 
Determine whether a function is even, odd, or neither from its graph. 
Graph functions using compressions and stretches. 
Combine transformations. 

Figure 1 (credit: "Misko"/Flickr) 
We all know that a flat mirror enables us to see an accurate image of ourselves and whatever is behind us. When we tilt 
the mirror, the images we see may shift horizontally or vertically. But what happens when we bend a flexible mirror? Like 
a carnival funhouse mirror, it presents us with a distorted image of ourselves, stretched or compressed horizontally or 
vertically. In a similar way, we can distort or transform mathematical functions to better adapt them to describing 
objects or processes in the real world. In this section, we will take a look at several kinds of transformations. 

Graphing Functions Using Vertical and Horizontal Shifts 
Often when given a problem, we try to model the scenario using mathematics in the form of words, tables, graphs, and 
equations. One method we can employ is to adapt the basic graphs of the toolkit functions to build new models for a 
given scenario. There are systematic ways to alter functions to construct appropriate models for the problems we are 
trying to solve. 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.5 • Transformation of Functions     249

Identifying Vertical Shifts 
One simple kind of transformation involves shifting the entire graph of a function up, down, right, or left. The simplest 
shift is a vertical shift, moving the graph up or down, because this transformation involves adding a positive or negative 
constant to the function. In other words, we add the same constant to the output value of the function regardless of the 
input. For a function  the function  is shifted vertically  units. See Figure 2 for an example. 

Figure 2 Vertical shift by  of the cube root function 

To help you visualize the concept of a vertical shift, consider that  Therefore,  is equivalent to 
Every unit of  is replaced by  so the y-value increases or decreases depending on the value of  The result is a 
shift upward or downward. 

Vertical Shift 

Given a function  a new function  where  is a constant, is a vertical shift of the function 
All the output values change by  units. If  is positive, the graph will shift up. If  is negative, the graph will shift 
down. 

EXAMPLE 1 

Adding a Constant to a Function 
To regulate temperature in a green building, airflow vents near the roof open and close throughout the day. Figure 3 
shows the area of open vents  (in square feet) throughout the day in hours after midnight,  During the summer, the 
facilities manager decides to try to better regulate temperature by increasing the amount of open vents by 20 square 
feet throughout the day and night. Sketch a graph of this new function. 

Figure 3 

Solution 
We can sketch a graph of this new function by adding 20 to each of the output values of the original function. This will 
have the effect of shifting the graph vertically up, as shown in Figure 4. 



250     3 • Functions

Figure 4 
Notice that in Figure 4, for each input value, the output value has increased by 20, so if we call the new function  we 
could write 

This notation tells us that, for any value of  can be found by evaluating the function  at the same input and then 
adding 20 to the result. This defines  as a transformation of the function  in this case a vertical shift up 20 units. 
Notice that, with a vertical shift, the input values stay the same and only the output values change. See Table 1. 

0 8 10 17 19 24 

0 0 220 220 0 0 

20 20 240 240 20 20 

Table 1 

...
HOW TO 

Given a tabular function, create a new row to represent a vertical shift. 

1. Identify the output row or column. 
2. Determine the magnitude of the shift. 
3. Add the shift to the value in each output cell. Add a positive value for up or a negative value for down. 

EXAMPLE 2 

Shifting a Tabular Function Vertically 
A function  is given in Table 2. Create a table for the function 

2 4 6 8 

1 3 7 11 

Table 2 

Solution 
The formula  tells us that we can find the output values of  by subtracting 3 from the output values of 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.5 • Transformation of Functions     251

For example: 

Subtracting 3 from each  value, we can complete a table of values for  as shown in Table 3. 

2 4 6 8 

1 3 7 11 

−2 0 4 8 

Table 3 

Analysis 
As with the earlier vertical shift, notice the input values stay the same and only the output values change. 

 TRY IT #1 The function  gives the height  of a ball (in meters) thrown upward from the 
ground after  seconds. Suppose the ball was instead thrown from the top of a 10-m building. 
Relate this new height function  to  and then find a formula for 

Identifying Horizontal Shifts 
We just saw that the vertical shift is a change to the output, or outside, of the function. We will now look at how changes 
to input, on the inside of the function, change its graph and meaning. A shift to the input results in a movement of the 
graph of the function left or right in what is known as a horizontal shift, shown in Figure 5. 

Figure 5 Horizontal shift of the function  Note that  means , which shifts the graph to the left, 
that is, towards negative values of 

For example, if  then  is a new function. Each input is reduced by 2 prior to squaring the 
function. The result is that the graph is shifted 2 units to the right, because we would need to increase the prior input by 
2 units to yield the same output value as given in 

Horizontal Shift 

Given a function  a new function  where  is a constant, is a horizontal shift of the function  If 
is positive, the graph will shift right. If  is negative, the graph will shift left. 



252     3 • Functions

EXAMPLE 3 

Adding a Constant to an Input 
Returning to our building airflow example from Figure 3, suppose that in autumn the facilities manager decides that the 
original venting plan starts too late, and wants to begin the entire venting program 2 hours earlier. Sketch a graph of the 
new function. 

Solution 
We can set  to be the original program and  to be the revised program. 

In the new graph, at each time, the airflow is the same as the original function  was 2 hours later. For example, in the 
original function  the airflow starts to change at 8 a.m., whereas for the function  the airflow starts to change at 6 
a.m. The comparable function values are  See Figure 6. Notice also that the vents first opened to  at 
10 a.m. under the original plan, while under the new plan the vents reach  at 
8 a.m., so 
In both cases, we see that, because  starts 2 hours sooner,  That means that the same output values are 
reached when 

Figure 6 

Analysis 
Note that  has the effect of shifting the graph to the left. 
Horizontal changes or “inside changes” affect the domain of a function (the input) instead of the range and often seem 
counterintuitive. The new function  uses the same outputs as  but matches those outputs to inputs 2 hours 
earlier than those of  Said another way, we must add 2 hours to the input of  to find the corresponding output for 

...
HOW TO 

Given a tabular function, create a new row to represent a horizontal shift. 

1. Identify the input row or column. 
2. Determine the magnitude of the shift. 
3. Add the shift to the value in each input cell. 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.5 • Transformation of Functions     253

EXAMPLE 4 

Shifting a Tabular Function Horizontally 
A function  is given in Table 4. Create a table for the function 

2 4 6 8 

1 3 7 11 

Table 4 

Solution 
The formula  tells us that the output values of  are the same as the output value of  when the input 
value is 3 less than the original value. For example, we know that  To get the same output from the function 
we will need an input value that is 3 larger. We input a value that is 3 larger for  because the function takes 3 away 
before evaluating the function 

We continue with the other values to create Table 5. 

5 7 9 11 

2 4 6 8 

1 3 7 11 

1 3 7 11 

Table 5 

The result is that the function  has been shifted to the right by 3. Notice the output values for  remain the same 
as the output values for  but the corresponding input values,  have shifted to the right by 3. Specifically, 2 shifted 
to 5, 4 shifted to 7, 6 shifted to 9, and 8 shifted to 11. 

Analysis 
Figure 7 represents both of the functions. We can see the horizontal shift in each point. 



254     3 • Functions

Figure 7 

EXAMPLE 5 

Identifying a Horizontal Shift of a Toolkit Function 
Figure 8 represents a transformation of the toolkit function  Relate this new function  to  and then 
find a formula for 

Figure 8 

Solution 
Notice that the graph is identical in shape to the  function, but the x-values are shifted to the right 2 units. The 
vertex used to be at (0,0), but now the vertex is at (2,0). The graph is the basic quadratic function shifted 2 units to the 
right, so 

Notice how we must input the value  to get the output value  the x-values must be 2 units larger because of 
the shift to the right by 2 units. We can then use the definition of the  function to write a formula for  by 
evaluating 

Analysis 
To determine whether the shift is  or  , consider a single reference point on the graph. For a quadratic, looking at 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.5 • Transformation of Functions     255

the vertex point is convenient. In the original function,  In our shifted function,  To obtain the output 
value of 0 from the function  we need to decide whether a plus or a minus sign will work to satisfy 

 For this to work, we will need to subtract 2 units from our input values. 

EXAMPLE 6 

Interpreting Horizontal versus Vertical Shifts 
The function  gives the number of gallons of gas required to drive  miles. Interpret  and 

Solution 
 can be interpreted as adding 10 to the output, gallons. This is the gas required to drive  miles, plus another 

10 gallons of gas. The graph would indicate a vertical shift. 
 can be interpreted as adding 10 to the input, miles. So this is the number of gallons of gas required to drive 

10 miles more than  miles. The graph would indicate a horizontal shift. 

 TRY IT #2 Given the function  graph the original function  and the transformation 
 on the same axes. Is this a horizontal or a vertical shift? Which way is the graph 

shifted and by how many units? 

Combining Vertical and Horizontal Shifts 
Now that we have two transformations, we can combine them. Vertical shifts are outside changes that affect the output 
(y-) values and shift the function up or down. Horizontal shifts are inside changes that affect the input (x-) values and 
shift the function left or right. Combining the two types of shifts will cause the graph of a function to shift up or down 
and left or right. 

...
HOW TO 

Given a function and both a vertical and a horizontal shift, sketch the graph. 

1. Identify the vertical and horizontal shifts from the formula. 
2. The vertical shift results from a constant added to the output. Move the graph up for a positive constant and 

down for a negative constant. 
3. The horizontal shift results from a constant added to the input. Move the graph left for a positive constant and 

right for a negative constant. 
4. Apply the shifts to the graph in either order. 

EXAMPLE 7 

Graphing Combined Vertical and Horizontal Shifts 
Given  sketch a graph of 

Solution 
The function  is our toolkit absolute value function. We know that this graph has a V shape, with the point at the origin. 
The graph of  has transformed  in two ways:  is a change on the inside of the function, giving a horizontal 
shift left by 1, and the subtraction by 3 in  is a change to the outside of the function, giving a vertical shift 
down by 3. The transformation of the graph is illustrated in Figure 9. 
Let us follow one point of the graph of 

• The point  is transformed first by shifting left 1 unit: 
• The point  is transformed next by shifting down 3 units: 



256     3 • Functions

Figure 9 
Figure 10 shows the graph of 

Figure 10 

 TRY IT #3 Given  sketch a graph of 

EXAMPLE 8 

Identifying Combined Vertical and Horizontal Shifts 
Write a formula for the graph shown in Figure 11, which is a transformation of the toolkit square root function. 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.5 • Transformation of Functions     257

Figure 11 

Solution 
The graph of the toolkit function starts at the origin, so this graph has been shifted 1 to the right and up 2. In function 
notation, we could write that as 

Using the formula for the square root function, we can write 

Analysis 
Note that this transformation has changed the domain and range of the function. This new graph has domain ∞  and 
range ∞

 TRY IT #4 Write a formula for a transformation of the toolkit reciprocal function  that shifts the 
function’s graph one unit to the right and one unit up. 

Graphing Functions Using Reflections about the Axes 
Another transformation that can be applied to a function is a reflection over the x- or y-axis. A vertical reflection reflects 
a graph vertically across the x-axis, while a horizontal reflection reflects a graph horizontally across the y-axis. The 
reflections are shown in Figure 12. 

Figure 12 Vertical and horizontal reflections of a function. 
Notice that the vertical reflection produces a new graph that is a mirror image of the base or original graph about the 



258     3 • Functions

x-axis. The horizontal reflection produces a new graph that is a mirror image of the base or original graph about the 
y-axis. 

Reflections 

Given a function  a new function  is a vertical reflection of the function  sometimes called a 
reflection about (or over, or through) the x-axis. 

Given a function  a new function  is a horizontal reflection of the function  sometimes called 
a reflection about the y-axis. 

...
HOW TO 

Given a function, reflect the graph both vertically and horizontally. 

1. Multiply all outputs by –1 for a vertical reflection. The new graph is a reflection of the original graph about the 
x-axis. 

2. Multiply all inputs by –1 for a horizontal reflection. The new graph is a reflection of the original graph about the 
y-axis. 

EXAMPLE 9 

Reflecting a Graph Horizontally and Vertically 
Reflect the graph of  (a) vertically and (b) horizontally. 

Solution 
ⓐ 
Reflecting the graph vertically means that each output value will be reflected over the horizontal t-axis as shown in 
Figure 13. 

Figure 13 Vertical reflection of the square root function 
Because each output value is the opposite of the original output value, we can write 

Notice that this is an outside change, or vertical shift, that affects the output  values, so the negative sign belongs 
outside of the function. 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.5 • Transformation of Functions     259

ⓑ 
Reflecting horizontally means that each input value will be reflected over the vertical axis as shown in Figure 14. 

Figure 14 Horizontal reflection of the square root function 
Because each input value is the opposite of the original input value, we can write 

Notice that this is an inside change or horizontal change that affects the input values, so the negative sign is on the 
inside of the function. 
Note that these transformations can affect the domain and range of the functions. While the original square root 
function has domain ∞  and range ∞  the vertical reflection gives the  function the range ∞  and 

the horizontal reflection gives the  function the domain ∞

 TRY IT #5 Reflect the graph of  (a) vertically and (b) horizontally. 

EXAMPLE 10 

Reflecting a Tabular Function Horizontally and Vertically 
A function  is given as Table 6. Create a table for the functions below. 

ⓐ   ⓑ  

2 4 6 8 

1 3 7 11 

Table 6 



260     3 • Functions

Solution 
ⓐ 
For  the negative sign outside the function indicates a vertical reflection, so the x-values stay the same and each 
output value will be the opposite of the original output value. See Table 7. 

2 4 6 8 

–1 –3 –7 –11 

Table 7 

ⓑ 
For  the negative sign inside the function indicates a horizontal reflection, so each input value will be the 
opposite of the original input value and the  values stay the same as the  values. See Table 8. 

−2 −4 −6 −8 

1 3 7 11 

Table 8 

 TRY IT #6 A function  is given as Table 9. Create a table for the functions below. 

ⓐ   ⓑ  

−2 0 2 4 

5 10 15 20 

Table 9 

EXAMPLE 11 

Applying a Learning Model Equation 
A common model for learning has an equation similar to  where  is the percentage of mastery that can 
be achieved after  practice sessions. This is a transformation of the function  shown in Figure 15. Sketch a 
graph of 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.5 • Transformation of Functions     261

Figure 15 

Solution 
This equation combines three transformations into one equation. 

• A horizontal reflection: 
• A vertical reflection: 
• A vertical shift: 

We can sketch a graph by applying these transformations one at a time to the original function. Let us follow two points 
through each of the three transformations. We will choose the points (0, 1) and (1, 2). 
1. First, we apply a horizontal reflection: (0, 1) (–1, 2). 
2. Then, we apply a vertical reflection: (0, -1) (-1, –2) 
3. Finally, we apply a vertical shift: (0, 0) (-1, -1)). 

This means that the original points, (0,1) and (1,2) become (0,0) and (-1,-1) after we apply the transformations. 
In Figure 16, the first graph results from a horizontal reflection. The second results from a vertical reflection. The third 
results from a vertical shift up 1 unit. 

Figure 16 

Analysis 
As a model for learning, this function would be limited to a domain of  with corresponding range 

 TRY IT #7 Given the toolkit function  graph  and  Take note of any 



262     3 • Functions

surprising behavior for these functions. 

Determining Even and Odd Functions 
Some functions exhibit symmetry so that reflections result in the original graph. For example, horizontally reflecting the 
toolkit functions  or  will result in the original graph. We say that these types of graphs are 
symmetric about the y-axis. A function whose graph is symmetric about the y-axis is called an even function. 

If the graphs of  or  were reflected over both axes, the result would be the original graph, as shown 
in Figure 17. 

Figure 17 (a) The cubic toolkit function (b) Horizontal reflection of the cubic toolkit function (c) Horizontal and vertical 
reflections reproduce the original cubic function. 
We say that these graphs are symmetric about the origin. A function with a graph that is symmetric about the origin is 
called an odd function. 
Note: A function can be neither even nor odd if it does not exhibit either symmetry. For example,  is neither 
even nor odd. Also, the only function that is both even and odd is the constant function 

Even and Odd Functions 

A function is called an even function if for every input 

The graph of an even function is symmetric about the  axis. 

A function is called an odd function if for every input 

The graph of an odd function is symmetric about the origin. 

...
HOW TO 

Given the formula for a function, determine if the function is even, odd, or neither. 

1. Determine whether the function satisfies  If it does, it is even. 
2. Determine whether the function satisfies  If it does, it is odd. 
3. If the function does not satisfy either rule, it is neither even nor odd. 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.5 • Transformation of Functions     263

EXAMPLE 12 

Determining whether a Function Is Even, Odd, or Neither 
Is the function  even, odd, or neither? 

Solution 
Without looking at a graph, we can determine whether the function is even or odd by finding formulas for the reflections 
and determining if they return us to the original function. Let’s begin with the rule for even functions. 

This does not return us to the original function, so this function is not even. We can now test the rule for odd functions. 

Because  this is an odd function. 

Analysis 
Consider the graph of  in Figure 18. Notice that the graph is symmetric about the origin. For every point  on the 
graph, the corresponding point  is also on the graph. For example, (1, 3) is on the graph of  and the 
corresponding point  is also on the graph. 

Figure 18 

 TRY IT #8 Is the function  even, odd, or neither? 

Graphing Functions Using Stretches and Compressions 
Adding a constant to the inputs or outputs of a function changed the position of a graph with respect to the axes, but it 
did not affect the shape of a graph. We now explore the effects of multiplying the inputs or outputs by some quantity. 
We can transform the inside (input values) of a function or we can transform the outside (output values) of a function. 
Each change has a specific effect that can be seen graphically. 

Vertical Stretches and Compressions 
When we multiply a function by a positive constant, we get a function whose graph is stretched or compressed vertically 
in relation to the graph of the original function. If the constant is greater than 1, we get a vertical stretch; if the 
constant is between 0 and 1, we get a vertical compression. Figure 19 shows a function multiplied by constant factors 2 
and 0.5 and the resulting vertical stretch and compression. 



264     3 • Functions

Figure 19 Vertical stretch and compression 

Vertical Stretches and Compressions 

Given a function  a new function  where  is a constant, is a vertical stretch or vertical 
compression of the function 

• If  then the graph will be stretched. 
• If  then the graph will be compressed. 
• If  then there will be combination of a vertical stretch or compression with a vertical reflection. 

...
HOW TO 

Given a function, graph its vertical stretch. 

1. Identify the value of 
2. Multiply all range values by 
3. If  the graph is stretched by a factor of 

If  the graph is compressed by a factor of 

If  the graph is either stretched or compressed and also reflected about the x-axis. 

EXAMPLE 13 

Graphing a Vertical Stretch 
A function  models the population of fruit flies. The graph is shown in Figure 20. 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.5 • Transformation of Functions     265

Figure 20 
A scientist is comparing this population to another population,  whose growth follows the same pattern, but is twice 
as large. Sketch a graph of this population. 

Solution 
Because the population is always twice as large, the new population’s output values are always twice the original 
function’s output values. Graphically, this is shown in Figure 21. 
If we choose four reference points, (0, 1), (3, 3), (6, 2) and (7, 0) we will multiply all of the outputs by 2. 
The following shows where the new points for the new graph will be located. 

Figure 21 
Symbolically, the relationship is written as 

This means that for any input  the value of the function  is twice the value of the function  Notice that the effect on 
the graph is a vertical stretching of the graph, where every point doubles its distance from the horizontal axis. The input 
values,  stay the same while the output values are twice as large as before. 



266     3 • Functions

...
HOW TO 

Given a tabular function and assuming that the transformation is a vertical stretch or compression, create a 
table for a vertical compression. 

1. Determine the value of 
2. Multiply all of the output values by 

EXAMPLE 14 

Finding a Vertical Compression of a Tabular Function 
A function  is given as Table 10. Create a table for the function 

2 4 6 8 

1 3 7 11 

Table 10 

Solution 
The formula  tells us that the output values of  are half of the output values of  with the same inputs. For 
example, we know that  Then 

We do the same for the other values to produce Table 11. 

Table 11 

Analysis 
The result is that the function  has been compressed vertically by  Each output value is divided in half, so the 
graph is half the original height. 

 TRY IT #9 A function  is given as Table 12. Create a table for the function 

2 4 6 8 

12 16 20 0 

Table 12 

EXAMPLE 15 

Recognizing a Vertical Stretch 
The graph in Figure 22 is a transformation of the toolkit function  Relate this new function  to  and 
then find a formula for 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.5 • Transformation of Functions     267

Figure 22 

Solution 
When trying to determine a vertical stretch or shift, it is helpful to look for a point on the graph that is relatively clear. In 
this graph, it appears that  With the basic cubic function at the same input,  Based on that, it 
appears that the outputs of  are  the outputs of the function  because  From this we can fairly safely 
conclude that 

We can write a formula for  by using the definition of the function 

 TRY IT #10 Write the formula for the function that we get when we stretch the identity toolkit function by a 
factor of 3, and then shift it down by 2 units. 

Horizontal Stretches and Compressions 
Now we consider changes to the inside of a function. When we multiply a function’s input by a positive constant, we get a 
function whose graph is stretched or compressed horizontally in relation to the graph of the original function. If the 
constant is between 0 and 1, we get a horizontal stretch; if the constant is greater than 1, we get a horizontal 
compression of the function. 



268     3 • Functions

Figure 23 
Given a function  the form  results in a horizontal stretch or compression. Consider the function 

 Observe Figure 23. The graph of  is a horizontal stretch of the graph of the function  by a 
factor of 2. The graph of  is a horizontal compression of the graph of the function  by a factor of . 

Horizontal Stretches and Compressions 

Given a function  a new function  where  is a constant, is a horizontal stretch or horizontal 
compression of the function 

• If  then the graph will be compressed by 
• If  then the graph will be stretched by 
• If  then there will be combination of a horizontal stretch or compression with a horizontal reflection. 

...
HOW TO 

Given a description of a function, sketch a horizontal compression or stretch. 

1. Write a formula to represent the function. 
2. Set  where  for a compression or  for a stretch. 

EXAMPLE 16 

Graphing a Horizontal Compression 
Suppose a scientist is comparing a population of fruit flies to a population that progresses through its lifespan twice as 
fast as the original population. In other words, this new population,  will progress in 1 hour the same amount as the 
original population does in 2 hours, and in 2 hours, it will progress as much as the original population does in 4 hours. 
Sketch a graph of this population. 

Solution 
Symbolically, we could write 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.5 • Transformation of Functions     269

See Figure 24 for a graphical comparison of the original population and the compressed population. 

Figure 24 (a) Original population graph (b) Compressed population graph 

Analysis 
Note that the effect on the graph is a horizontal compression where all input values are half of their original distance 
from the vertical axis. 

EXAMPLE 17 

Finding a Horizontal Stretch for a Tabular Function 
A function  is given as Table 13. Create a table for the function 

2 4 6 8 

1 3 7 11 

Table 13 

Solution 
The formula  tells us that the output values for  are the same as the output values for the function  at 
an input half the size. Notice that we do not have enough information to determine  because 

 and we do not have a value for  in our table. Our input values to  will need to be twice as 
large to get inputs for  that we can evaluate. For example, we can determine 

We do the same for the other values to produce Table 14. 

4 8 12 16 

1 3 7 11 

Table 14 



270     3 • Functions

Figure 25 shows the graphs of both of these sets of points. 

Figure 25 

Analysis 
Because each input value has been doubled, the result is that the function  has been stretched horizontally by a 
factor of 2. 

EXAMPLE 18 

Recognizing a Horizontal Compression on a Graph 
Relate the function  to  in Figure 26. 

Figure 26 

Solution 
The graph of  looks like the graph of  horizontally compressed. Because  ends at  and  ends at 

 we can see that the  values have been compressed by  because  We might also notice that 
 and  Either way, we can describe this relationship as  This is a horizontal 

compression by 

Analysis 
Notice that the coefficient needed for a horizontal stretch or compression is the reciprocal of the stretch or compression. 
So to stretch the graph horizontally by a scale factor of 4, we need a coefficient of  in our function:  This means 
that the input values must be four times larger to produce the same result, requiring the input to be larger, causing the 
horizontal stretching. 

 TRY IT #11 Write a formula for the toolkit square root function horizontally stretched by a factor of 3. 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.5 • Transformation of Functions     271

Performing a Sequence of Transformations 
When combining transformations, it is very important to consider the order of the transformations. For example, 
vertically shifting by 3 and then vertically stretching by 2 does not create the same graph as vertically stretching by 2 and 
then vertically shifting by 3, because when we shift first, both the original function and the shift get stretched, while only 
the original function gets stretched when we stretch first. 
When we see an expression such as  which transformation should we start with? The answer here follows 
nicely from the order of operations. Given the output value of  we first multiply by 2, causing the vertical stretch, 
and then add 3, causing the vertical shift. In other words, multiplication before addition. 
Horizontal transformations are a little trickier to think about. When we write  for example, we have to 
think about how the inputs to the function  relate to the inputs to the function  Suppose we know  What 
input to  would produce that output? In other words, what value of  will allow  We would need 

 To solve for  we would first subtract 3, resulting in a horizontal shift, and then divide by 2, causing a 
horizontal compression. 
This format ends up being very difficult to work with, because it is usually much easier to horizontally stretch a graph 
before shifting. We can work around this by factoring inside the function. 

Let’s work through an example. 

We can factor out a 2. 

Now we can more clearly observe a horizontal shift to the left 2 units and a horizontal compression. Factoring in this way 
allows us to horizontally stretch first and then shift horizontally. 

Combining Transformations 

When combining vertical transformations written in the form  first vertically stretch by  and then vertically 
shift by 

When combining horizontal transformations written in the form  first horizontally shift by  and then 
horizontally stretch by 

When combining horizontal transformations written in the form  first horizontally stretch by  and then 
horizontally shift by 

Horizontal and vertical transformations are independent. It does not matter whether horizontal or vertical 
transformations are performed first. 

EXAMPLE 19 

Finding a Triple Transformation of a Tabular Function 
Given Table 15 for the function  create a table of values for the function 

6 12 18 24 

10 14 15 17 

Table 15 

Solution 
There are three steps to this transformation, and we will work from the inside out. Starting with the horizontal 



272     3 • Functions

transformations,  is a horizontal compression by  which means we multiply each  value by  See Table 16. 

2 4 6 8 

10 14 15 17 

Table 16 

Looking now to the vertical transformations, we start with the vertical stretch, which will multiply the output values by 2. 
We apply this to the previous transformation. See Table 17. 

2 4 6 8 

20 28 30 34 

Table 17 

Finally, we can apply the vertical shift, which will add 1 to all the output values. See Table 18. 

2 4 6 8 

21 29 31 35 

Table 18 

EXAMPLE 20 

Finding a Triple Transformation of a Graph 
Use the graph of  in Figure 27 to sketch a graph of 

Figure 27 

Solution 
To simplify, let’s start by factoring out the inside of the function. 

By factoring the inside, we can first horizontally stretch by 2, as indicated by the  on the inside of the function. 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.5 • Transformation of Functions     273

Remember that twice the size of 0 is still 0, so the point (0,2) remains at (0,2) while the point (2,0) will stretch to (4,0). See 
Figure 28. 

Figure 28 
Next, we horizontally shift left by 2 units, as indicated by  See Figure 29. 

Figure 29 
Last, we vertically shift down by 3 to complete our sketch, as indicated by the  on the outside of the function. See 
Figure 30. 



274     3 • Functions

Figure 30 

 MEDIA 

Access this online resource for additional instruction and practice with transformation of functions. 

Function Transformations (https://openstax.org/l/functrans) 

 3.5 SECTION EXERCISES 
Verbal 

1 . When examining the  2 . When examining the  3 . When examining the 
formula of a function that is formula of a function that is formula of a function that is 
the result of multiple the result of multiple the result of multiple 
transformations, how can transformations, how can transformations, how can 
you tell a horizontal shift you tell a horizontal stretch you tell a horizontal 
from a vertical shift? from a vertical stretch? compression from a vertical 

compression? 
4 . When examining the  5 . How can you determine 

formula of a function that is whether a function is odd or 
the result of multiple even from the formula of 
transformations, how can the function? 
you tell a reflection with 
respect to the x-axis from a 
reflection with respect to the 
y-axis? 

Algebraic 

For the following exercises, write a formula for the function obtained when the graph is shifted as described. 

6 .  is shifted up 1  7 .  is shifted down 3  8 .  is shifted down 4 
unit and to the left 2 units. units and to the right 1 unit. units and to the right 3 

units. 

9 .  is shifted up 2 
units and to the left 4 units. 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.5 • Transformation of Functions     275

For the following exercises, describe how the graph of the function is a transformation of the graph of the original 
function 
10 .  11 .  12 . 
13 .  14 .  15 . 
16 .  17 .  18 . 
19 . 

For the following exercises, determine the interval(s) on which the function is increasing and decreasing. 

20 .  21 .  22 . 

23 . 

Graphical 

For the following exercises, use the graph of  shown in Figure 31 to sketch a graph of each transformation of 

Figure 31 

24 .  25 . 26 . 

For the following exercises, sketch a graph of the function as a transformation of the graph of one of the toolkit 
functions. 

27 . 28 .  29 . 

30 . 



276     3 • Functions

Numeric 

31 . Tabular representations for the  32 . Tabular representations for the functions 
functions  and  are given and  are given below. Write  and  as 
below. Write  and  as transformations of 
transformations of 

−2 −1 0 1 2 
−2 −1 0 1 2 

−1 −3 4 2 1 
−2 −1 −3 1 2 

−3 −2 −1 0 1 
−1 0 1 2 3 

−1 −3 4 2 1 
−2 −1 −3 1 2 

−2 −1 0 1 2 
−2 −1 0 1 2 

−2 −4 3 1 0 
−1 0 −2 2 3 

For the following exercises, write an equation for each graphed function by using transformations of the graphs of one 
of the toolkit functions. 
33 . 34 . 35 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.5 • Transformation of Functions     277

36 . 37 . 38 . 

39 . 40 . 

For the following exercises, use the graphs of transformations of the square root function to find a formula for each of 
the functions. 
41 . 42 . 



278     3 • Functions

For the following exercises, use the graphs of the transformed toolkit functions to write a formula for each of the 
resulting functions. 
43 . 44 . 45 . 

46 . 

For the following exercises, determine whether the function is odd, even, or neither. 

47 .  48 .  49 . 

50 .  51 .  52 . 

For the following exercises, describe how the graph of each function is a transformation of the graph of the original 
function 
53 .  54 .  55 . 
56 .  57 .  58 . 

59 .  60 .  61 . 

62 . 

For the following exercises, write a formula for the function  that results when the graph of a given toolkit function is 
transformed as described. 

63 . The graph of  is  64 . The graph of  is  65 . The graph of  is 
reflected over the  -axis reflected over the  -axis vertically compressed by a 
and horizontally and horizontally stretched factor of  then shifted to 
compressed by a factor of by a factor of 2. 

 . the left 2 units and down 3 
units. 

66 . The graph of  is  67 . The graph of  is  68 . The graph of  is 
vertically stretched by a vertically compressed by a horizontally stretched by a 
factor of 8, then shifted to factor of  then shifted to factor of 3, then shifted to 
the right 4 units and up 2 the right 5 units and up 1 the left 4 units and down 3 
units. unit. units. 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.6 • Absolute Value Functions     279

For the following exercises, describe how the formula is a transformation of a toolkit function. Then sketch a graph of the 
transformation. 

69 . 70 .  71 . 

72 .  73 . 74 . 

75 . 76 .  77 . 

For the following exercises, use the graph in Figure 32 to sketch the given transformations. 

Figure 32 
78 .  79 . 80 . 
81 . 

3.6 Absolute Value Functions 
Learning Objectives 
In this section, you will: 

Graph an absolute value function. 
Solve an absolute value equation. 

Figure 1 Distances in deep space can be measured in all directions. As such, it is useful to consider distance in terms of 
absolute values. (credit: "s58y"/Flickr) 
Until the 1920s, the so-called spiral nebulae were believed to be clouds of dust and gas in our own galaxy, some tens of 



280     3 • Functions

thousands of light years away. Then, astronomer Edwin Hubble proved that these objects are galaxies in their own right, 
at distances of millions of light years. Today, astronomers can detect galaxies that are billions of light years away. 
Distances in the universe can be measured in all directions. As such, it is useful to consider distance as an absolute value 
function. In this section, we will continue our investigation of absolute value functions. 

Understanding Absolute Value 
Recall that in its basic form  the absolute value function is one of our toolkit functions. The absolute value 
function is commonly thought of as providing the distance the number is from zero on a number line. Algebraically, for 
whatever the input value is, the output is the value without regard to sign. Knowing this, we can use absolute value 
functions to solve some kinds of real-world problems. 

Absolute Value Function 

The absolute value function can be defined as a piecewise function 

EXAMPLE 1 

Using Absolute Value to Determine Resistance 
Electrical parts, such as resistors and capacitors, come with specified values of their operating parameters: resistance, 
capacitance, etc. However, due to imprecision in manufacturing, the actual values of these parameters vary somewhat 
from piece to piece, even when they are supposed to be the same. The best that manufacturers can do is to try to 
guarantee that the variations will stay within a specified range, often  or 
Suppose we have a resistor rated at 680 ohms,  Use the absolute value function to express the range of possible 
values of the actual resistance. 

Solution 
We can find that 5% of 680 ohms is 34 ohms. The absolute value of the difference between the actual and nominal 
resistance should not exceed the stated variability, so, with the resistance  in ohms, 

 TRY IT #1 Students who score within 20 points of 80 will pass a test. Write this as a distance from 80 using 
absolute value notation. 

Graphing an Absolute Value Function 
The most significant feature of the absolute value graph is the corner point at which the graph changes direction. This 
point is shown at the origin in Figure 2. 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.6 • Absolute Value Functions     281

Figure 2 
Figure 3 shows the graph of  The graph of  has been shifted right 3 units, vertically stretched by a 
factor of 2, and shifted up 4 units. This means that the corner point is located at  for this transformed function. 

Figure 3 

EXAMPLE 2 

Writing an Equation for an Absolute Value Function Given a Graph 
Write an equation for the function graphed in Figure 4. 



282     3 • Functions

Figure 4 

Solution 
The basic absolute value function changes direction at the origin, so this graph has been shifted to the right 3 units and 
down 2 units from the basic toolkit function. See Figure 5. 

Figure 5 
We also notice that the graph appears vertically stretched, because the width of the final graph on a horizontal line is not 
equal to 2 times the vertical distance from the corner to this line, as it would be for an unstretched absolute value 
function. Instead, the width is equal to 1 times the vertical distance as shown in Figure 6. 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.6 • Absolute Value Functions     283

Figure 6 
From this information we can write the equation 

Analysis 
Note that these equations are algebraically equivalent—the stretch for an absolute value function can be written 
interchangeably as a vertical or horizontal stretch or compression. Note also that if the vertical stretch factor is negative, 
there is also a reflection about the x-axis. 

 Q&A If we couldn’t observe the stretch of the function from the graphs, could we algebraically 
determine it? 

Yes. If we are unable to determine the stretch based on the width of the graph, we can solve for the 
stretch factor by putting in a known pair of values for  and 

Now substituting in the point (1, 2) 

 TRY IT #2 Write the equation for the absolute value function that is horizontally shifted left 2 units, is 
vertically reflected, and vertically shifted up 3 units. 

 Q&A Do the graphs of absolute value functions always intersect the vertical axis? The horizontal axis? 

Yes, they always intersect the vertical axis. The graph of an absolute value function will intersect the 
vertical axis when the input is zero. 

No, they do not always intersect the horizontal axis. The graph may or may not intersect the horizontal 
axis, depending on how the graph has been shifted and reflected. It is possible for the absolute value 
function to intersect the horizontal axis at zero, one, or two points (see Figure 7). 



284     3 • Functions

Figure 7 (a) The absolute value function does not intersect the horizontal axis. (b) The absolute value function intersects 
the horizontal axis at one point. (c) The absolute value function intersects the horizontal axis at two points. 

Solving an Absolute Value Equation 
In Other Type of Equations, we touched on the concepts of absolute value equations. Now that we understand a little 
more about their graphs, we can take another look at these types of equations. Now that we can graph an absolute 
value function, we will learn how to solve an absolute value equation. To solve an equation such as  we 
notice that the absolute value will be equal to 8 if the quantity inside the absolute value is 8 or -8. This leads to two 
different equations we can solve independently. 

Knowing how to solve problems involving absolute value functions is useful. For example, we may need to identify 
numbers or points on a line that are at a specified distance from a given reference point. 
An absolute value equation is an equation in which the unknown variable appears in absolute value bars. For example, 

Solutions to Absolute Value Equations 

For real numbers  and  , an equation of the form  with  will have solutions when  or 
If  the equation  has no solution. 

...
HOW TO 

Given the formula for an absolute value function, find the horizontal intercepts of its graph. 

1. Isolate the absolute value term. 
2. Use  to write  or  assuming 
3. Solve for 

EXAMPLE 3 

Finding the Zeros of an Absolute Value Function 
For the function  find the values of  such that 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.6 • Absolute Value Functions     285

Solution 

The function outputs 0 when  or  See Figure 8. 

Figure 8 

 TRY IT #3 For the function  find the values of  such that 

 Q&A Should we always expect two answers when solving 

No. We may find one, two, or even no answers. For example, there is no solution to 

 MEDIA 

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with absolute value. 

Graphing Absolute Value Functions (https://openstax.org/l/graphabsvalue) 
Graphing Absolute Value Functions 2 (https://openstax.org/l/graphabsvalue2) 

 3.6 SECTION EXERCISES 
Verbal 

1 . How do you solve an  2 . How can you tell whether an  3 . When solving an absolute 
absolute value equation? absolute value function has value function, the isolated 

two x-intercepts without absolute value term is equal 
graphing the function? to a negative number. What 

does that tell you about the 
graph of the absolute value 
function? 



286     3 • Functions

4 . How can you use the graph 
of an absolute value 
function to determine the 
x-values for which the 
function values are 
negative? 

Algebraic 

5 . Describe all numbers  that 6 . Describe all numbers  that 7 . Describe the situation in 
are at a distance of 4 from are at a distance of  from which the distance that 
the number 8. Express this the number −4. Express this point  is from 10 is at least 
set of numbers using set of numbers using 15 units. Express this set of 
absolute value notation. absolute value notation. numbers using absolute 

value notation. 
8 . Find all function values 

such that the distance from 
 to the value 8 is less 

than 0.03 units. Express this 
set of numbers using 
absolute value notation. 

For the following exercises, find the x- and y-intercepts of the graphs of each function. 
9 . 10 . 11 . 
12 . 13 . 14 . 
15 . 

Graphical 

For the following exercises, graph the absolute value function. Plot at least five points by hand for each graph. 
16 . 17 . 18 . 

For the following exercises, graph the given functions by hand. 
19 . 20 . 21 . 
22 . 23 . 24 . 
25 . 26 . 27 . 
28 . 29 . 30 . 

31 . 

Technology 

32 . Use a graphing utility to 33 . Use a graphing utility to 
graph  on graph 
the viewing window  on 
Identify the corresponding the viewing window 
range. Show the graph.  Identify the 

corresponding range. 
Show the graph. 

For the following exercises, graph each function using a graphing utility. Specify the viewing window. 

34 . 35 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.7 • Inverse Functions     287

Extensions 

For the following exercises, solve the inequality. 
36 . If possible, find all values of  such that there are  37 . If possible, find all values of  such that there are 

no  intercepts for no  -intercepts for 

Real-World Applications 

38 . Cities A and B are on the  39 . The true proportion  of  40 . Students who score within 
same east-west line. people who give a 18 points of the number 82 
Assume that city A is favorable rating to will pass a particular test. 
located at the origin. If the Congress is 8% with a Write this statement using 
distance from city A to city margin of error of 1.5%. absolute value notation 
B is at least 100 miles and Describe this statement and use the variable  for 

 represents the distance using an absolute value the score. 
from city B to city A, equation. 
express this using absolute 
value notation. 

41 . A machinist must produce  42 . The tolerance for a ball 
a bearing that is within bearing is 0.01. If the true 
0.01 inches of the correct diameter of the bearing is 
diameter of 5.0 inches. to be 2.0 inches and the 
Using  as the diameter of measured value of the 
the bearing, write this diameter is  inches, 
statement using absolute express the tolerance 
value notation. using absolute value 

notation. 

3.7 Inverse Functions 
Learning Objectives 
In this section, you will: 

Verify inverse functions. 
Determine the domain and range of an inverse function, and restrict the domain of a function to make it 
one-to-one. 
Find or evaluate the inverse of a function. 
Use the graph of a one-to-one function to graph its inverse function on the same axes. 

A reversible heat pump is a climate-control system that is an air conditioner and a heater in a single device. Operated in 
one direction, it pumps heat out of a house to provide cooling. Operating in reverse, it pumps heat into the building from 
the outside, even in cool weather, to provide heating. As a heater, a heat pump is several times more efficient than 
conventional electrical resistance heating. 
If some physical machines can run in two directions, we might ask whether some of the function “machines” we have 
been studying can also run backwards. Figure 1 provides a visual representation of this question. In this section, we will 
consider the reverse nature of functions. 



288     3 • Functions

Figure 1 Can a function “machine” operate in reverse? 

Verifying That Two Functions Are Inverse Functions 
Betty is traveling to Milan for a fashion show and wants to know what the temperature will be. She is not familiar with 
the Celsius scale. To get an idea of how temperature measurements are related, Betty wants to convert 75 degrees 
Fahrenheit to degrees Celsius using the formula 

and substitutes 75 for  to calculate 

Knowing that a comfortable 75 degrees Fahrenheit is about 24 degrees Celsius, Betty gets the week’s weather forecast 
from Figure 2 for Milan, and wants to convert all of the temperatures to degrees Fahrenheit. 

Figure 2 
At first, Betty considers using the formula she has already found to complete the conversions. After all, she knows her 
algebra, and can easily solve the equation for  after substituting a value for  For example, to convert 26 degrees 
Celsius, she could write 

After considering this option for a moment, however, she realizes that solving the equation for each of the temperatures 
will be awfully tedious. She realizes that since evaluation is easier than solving, it would be much more convenient to 
have a different formula, one that takes the Celsius temperature and outputs the Fahrenheit temperature. 
The formula for which Betty is searching corresponds to the idea of an inverse function, which is a function for which 
the input of the original function becomes the output of the inverse function and the output of the original function 
becomes the input of the inverse function. 

Given a function  we represent its inverse as  read as  inverse of  The raised  is part of the notation. 
It is not an exponent; it does not imply a power of  . In other words,  does not mean  because  is the 
reciprocal of  and not the inverse. 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.7 • Inverse Functions     289

The “exponent-like” notation comes from an analogy between function composition and multiplication: just as 
(1 is the identity element for multiplication) for any nonzero number  so  equals the identity function, that is, 

This holds for all  in the domain of  Informally, this means that inverse functions “undo” each other. However, just as 
zero does not have a reciprocal, some functions do not have inverses. 
Given a function  we can verify whether some other function  is the inverse of  by checking if both 

 and  are true. 

For example,  and  are inverse functions. 

and 

A few coordinate pairs from the graph of the function  are (−2, −8), (0, 0), and (2, 8). A few coordinate pairs from 
the graph of the function  are (−8, −2), (0, 0), and (8, 2). If we interchange the input and output of each coordinate 
pair of a function, the interchanged coordinate pairs would appear on the graph of the inverse function. 

Inverse Function 

For any one-to-one function  a function  is an inverse function of  if  This can also be 
written as  for all  in the domain of  It also follows that  for all  in the domain of 
if  is the inverse of 

The notation  is read  inverse.” Like any other function, we can use any variable name as the input for  so 
we will often write  which we read as  inverse of  Keep in mind that 

and not all functions have inverses. 

EXAMPLE 1 

Identifying an Inverse Function for a Given Input-Output Pair 
If for a particular one-to-one function  and  what are the corresponding input and output values for 
the inverse function? 

Solution 
The inverse function reverses the input and output quantities, so if 

Alternatively, if we want to name the inverse function  then  and 

Analysis 
Notice that if we show the coordinate pairs in a table form, the input and output are clearly reversed. See Table 1. 



290     3 • Functions

Table 1 

 TRY IT #1 Given that  what are the corresponding input and output values of the original 
function 

...
HOW TO 

Given two functions  and  test whether the functions are inverses of each other. 

1. Determine whether  or 
2. If both statements are true, then  and  If either statement is false, then both are false, and 

 and 

EXAMPLE 2 

Testing Inverse Relationships Algebraically 
If  and  is 

Solution 

We must also verify the other formula. 

so 

Analysis 
Notice the inverse operations are in reverse order of the operations from the original function. 

 TRY IT #2 If  and  is 

EXAMPLE 3 

Determining Inverse Relationships for Power Functions 
If  (the cube function) and  is 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.7 • Inverse Functions     291

Solution 

No, the functions are not inverses. 

Analysis 
The correct inverse to the cube is, of course, the cube root  that is, the one-third is an exponent, not a 
multiplier. 

 TRY IT #3 If  is 

Finding Domain and Range of Inverse Functions 
The outputs of the function  are the inputs to  so the range of  is also the domain of  Likewise, because the 
inputs to  are the outputs of  the domain of  is the range of  We can visualize the situation as in Figure 3. 

Figure 3 Domain and range of a function and its inverse 
When a function has no inverse function, it is possible to create a new function where that new function on a limited 
domain does have an inverse function. For example, the inverse of  is  because a square 
“undoes” a square root; but the square is only the inverse of the square root on the domain ∞  since that is the 
range of 

We can look at this problem from the other side, starting with the square (toolkit quadratic) function  If we 
want to construct an inverse to this function, we run into a problem, because for every given output of the quadratic 
function, there are two corresponding inputs (except when the input is 0). For example, the output 9 from the quadratic 
function corresponds to the inputs 3 and –3. But an output from a function is an input to its inverse; if this inverse input 
corresponds to more than one inverse output (input of the original function), then the “inverse” is not a function at all! To 
put it differently, the quadratic function is not a one-to-one function; it fails the horizontal line test, so it does not have an 
inverse function. In order for a function to have an inverse, it must be a one-to-one function. 
In many cases, if a function is not one-to-one, we can still restrict the function to a part of its domain on which it is one-
to-one. For example, we can make a restricted version of the square function  with its domain limited to 

∞  which is a one-to-one function (it passes the horizontal line test) and which has an inverse (the square-root 
function). 

If  on ∞  then the inverse function is 

• The domain of  = range of  = ∞
• The domain of  = range of  = ∞

 Q&A Is it possible for a function to have more than one inverse? 

No. If two supposedly different functions, say,  and  both meet the definition of being inverses of 
another function  then you can prove that  We have just seen that some functions only have 
inverses if we restrict the domain of the original function. In these cases, there may be more than one 
way to restrict the domain, leading to different inverses. However, on any one domain, the original 
function still has only one unique inverse. 



292     3 • Functions

Domain and Range of Inverse Functions 

The range of a function  is the domain of the inverse function 

The domain of  is the range of 

...
HOW TO 

Given a function, find the domain and range of its inverse. 

1. If the function is one-to-one, write the range of the original function as the domain of the inverse, and write the 
domain of the original function as the range of the inverse. 

2. If the domain of the original function needs to be restricted to make it one-to-one, then this restricted domain 
becomes the range of the inverse function. 

EXAMPLE 4 

Finding the Inverses of Toolkit Functions 
Identify which of the toolkit functions besides the quadratic function are not one-to-one, and find a restricted domain on 
which each function is one-to-one, if any. The toolkit functions are reviewed in Table 2. We restrict the domain in such a 
fashion that the function assumes all y-values exactly once. 

Constant Identity Quadratic Cubic Reciprocal 

Reciprocal squared Cube root Square root Absolute value 

Table 2 

Solution 
The constant function is not one-to-one, and there is no domain (except a single point) on which it could be one-to-one, 
so the constant function has no inverse. 

The absolute value function can be restricted to the domain ∞  where it is equal to the identity function. 

The reciprocal-squared function can be restricted to the domain ∞

Analysis 
We can see that these functions (if unrestricted) are not one-to-one by looking at their graphs, shown in Figure 4. They 
both would fail the horizontal line test. However, if a function is restricted to a certain domain so that it passes the 
horizontal line test, then in that restricted domain, it can have an inverse. 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.7 • Inverse Functions     293

Figure 4 (a) Absolute value (b) Reciprocal square 

 TRY IT #4 The domain of function  is ∞  and the range of function  is  Find the domain and 
range of the inverse function. 

Finding and Evaluating Inverse Functions 
Once we have a one-to-one function, we can evaluate its inverse at specific inverse function inputs or construct a 
complete representation of the inverse function in many cases. 

Inverting Tabular Functions 
Suppose we want to find the inverse of a function represented in table form. Remember that the domain of a function is 
the range of the inverse and the range of the function is the domain of the inverse. So we need to interchange the 
domain and range. 
Each row (or column) of inputs becomes the row (or column) of outputs for the inverse function. Similarly, each row (or 
column) of outputs becomes the row (or column) of inputs for the inverse function. 

EXAMPLE 5 

Interpreting the Inverse of a Tabular Function 
A function  is given in Table 3, showing distance in miles that a car has traveled in  minutes. Find and interpret 

30 50 70 90 

20 40 60 70 

Table 3 

Solution 
The inverse function takes an output of  and returns an input for  So in the expression  70 is an output value 
of the original function, representing 70 miles. The inverse will return the corresponding input of the original function 
90 minutes, so  The interpretation of this is that, to drive 70 miles, it took 90 minutes. 

Alternatively, recall that the definition of the inverse was that if  then  By this definition, if we are 
given  then we are looking for a value  so that  In this case, we are looking for a  so that 

 which is when 

 TRY IT #5 Using Table 4, find and interpret ⓐ   and ⓑ  



294     3 • Functions

30 50 60 70 90 

20 40 50 60 70 

Table 4 

Evaluating the Inverse of a Function, Given a Graph of the Original Function 
We saw in Functions and Function Notation that the domain of a function can be read by observing the horizontal extent 
of its graph. We find the domain of the inverse function by observing the vertical extent of the graph of the original 
function, because this corresponds to the horizontal extent of the inverse function. Similarly, we find the range of the 
inverse function by observing the horizontal extent of the graph of the original function, as this is the vertical extent of 
the inverse function. If we want to evaluate an inverse function, we find its input within its domain, which is all or part of 
the vertical axis of the original function’s graph. 

...
HOW TO 

Given the graph of a function, evaluate its inverse at specific points. 

1. Find the desired input on the y-axis of the given graph. 
2. Read the inverse function’s output from the x-axis of the given graph. 

EXAMPLE 6 

Evaluating a Function and Its Inverse from a Graph at Specific Points 
A function  is given in Figure 5. Find  and 

Figure 5 

Solution 
To evaluate  we find 3 on the x-axis and find the corresponding output value on the y-axis. The point  tells us 
that 

To evaluate  recall that by definition  means the value of x for which  By looking for the output 
value 3 on the vertical axis, we find the point  on the graph, which means  so by definition,  See 
Figure 6. 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.7 • Inverse Functions     295

Figure 6 

 TRY IT #6 Using the graph in Figure 5, ⓐ  find  and ⓑ  estimate 

Finding Inverses of Functions Represented by Formulas 
Sometimes we will need to know an inverse function for all elements of its domain, not just a few. If the original function 
is given as a formula—for example,  as a function of  we can often find the inverse function by solving to obtain  as 
a function of 

...
HOW TO 

Given a function represented by a formula, find the inverse. 

1. Make sure  is a one-to-one function. 
2. Solve for 
3. Interchange  and 
4. Replace  with . (Variables may be different in different cases, but the principle is the same.) 

EXAMPLE 7 

Inverting the Fahrenheit-to-Celsius Function 
Find a formula for the inverse function that gives Fahrenheit temperature as a function of Celsius temperature. 

Solution 

By solving in general, we have uncovered the inverse function. If 

then 

In this case, we introduced a function  to represent the conversion because the input and output variables are 
descriptive, and writing  could get confusing. 



296     3 • Functions

 TRY IT #7 Solve for  in terms of  given 

EXAMPLE 8 

Solving to Find an Inverse Function 
Find the inverse of the function 

Solution 

So  or 

Analysis 
The domain and range of  exclude the values 3 and 4, respectively.  and  are equal at two points but are not the 
same function, as we can see by creating Table 5. 

1 2 5 

3 2 5 

Table 5 

EXAMPLE 9 

Solving to Find an Inverse with Radicals 
Find the inverse of the function 

Solution 

So 

The domain of  is ∞  Notice that the range of  is ∞  so this means that the domain of the inverse function 
is also ∞

Analysis 
The formula we found for  looks like it would be valid for all real  However,  itself must have an inverse 
(namely,  ) so we have to restrict the domain of  to ∞  in order to make  a one-to-one function. This domain 
of  is exactly the range of 

 TRY IT #8 What is the inverse of the function  State the domains of both the function and 
the inverse function. 

Finding Inverse Functions and Their Graphs 
Now that we can find the inverse of a function, we will explore the graphs of functions and their inverses. Let us return to 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.7 • Inverse Functions     297

the quadratic function  restricted to the domain ∞  on which this function is one-to-one, and graph it as in 
Figure 7. 

Figure 7 Quadratic function with domain restricted to [0, ∞). 

Restricting the domain to ∞  makes the function one-to-one (it will obviously pass the horizontal line test), so it has 
an inverse on this restricted domain. 

We already know that the inverse of the toolkit quadratic function is the square root function, that is, 
What happens if we graph both  and  on the same set of axes, using the  axis for the input to both 

We notice a distinct relationship: The graph of  is the graph of  reflected about the diagonal line  which 
we will call the identity line, shown in Figure 8. 

Figure 8 Square and square-root functions on the non-negative domain 
This relationship will be observed for all one-to-one functions, because it is a result of the function and its inverse 
swapping inputs and outputs. This is equivalent to interchanging the roles of the vertical and horizontal axes. 

EXAMPLE 10 

Finding the Inverse of a Function Using Reflection about the Identity Line 
Given the graph of  in Figure 9, sketch a graph of 



298     3 • Functions

Figure 9 

Solution 
This is a one-to-one function, so we will be able to sketch an inverse. Note that the graph shown has an apparent domain 
of ∞  and range of ∞ ∞  so the inverse will have a domain of ∞ ∞  and range of ∞
If we reflect this graph over the line  the point  reflects to  and the point  reflects to 
Sketching the inverse on the same axes as the original graph gives Figure 10. 

Figure 10 The function and its inverse, showing reflection about the identity line 

 TRY IT #9 Draw graphs of the functions  and  from Example 8. 

 Q&A Is there any function that is equal to its own inverse? 

Yes. If  then  and we can think of several functions that have this property. The 
identity function does, and so does the reciprocal function, because 

Any function  where  is a constant, is also equal to its own inverse. 

 MEDIA 

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with inverse functions. 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.7 • Inverse Functions     299

Inverse Functions (https://openstax.org/l/inversefunction) 
One-to-one Functions (https://openstax.org/l/onetoone) 
Inverse Function Values Using Graph (https://openstax.org/l/inversfuncgraph) 
Restricting the Domain and Finding the Inverse (https://openstax.org/l/restrictdomain) 

 3.7 SECTION EXERCISES 
Verbal 

1 . Describe why the horizontal  2 . Why do we restrict the  3 . Can a function be its own 
line test is an effective way domain of the function inverse? Explain. 
to determine whether a  to find the 
function is one-to-one? function’s inverse? 

4 . Are one-to-one functions  5 . How do you find the inverse 
either always increasing or of a function algebraically? 
always decreasing? Why or 
why not? 

Algebraic 

6 . Show that the function  is its own 
inverse for all real numbers 

For the following exercises, find  for each function. 
7 .  8 .  9 . 

10 .  11 .  12 . 

For the following exercises, find a domain on which each function  is one-to-one and non-decreasing. Write the domain 
in interval notation. Then find the inverse of  restricted to that domain. 

13 .  14 .  15 . 

16 . Given  and 
ⓐ Find  and 
ⓑ What does the answer tell us about the 
relationship between  and 

For the following exercises, use function composition to verify that  and  are inverse functions. 

17 .  and  18 .  and 

Graphical 

For the following exercises, use a graphing utility to determine whether each function is one-to-one. 

19 .  20 .  21 . 

22 . 



300     3 • Functions

For the following exercises, determine whether the graph represents a one-to-one function. 
23 . 24 . 

For the following exercises, use the graph of  shown in Figure 11. 

Figure 11 

25 . Find  26 . Solve  27 . Find 

28 . Solve 

For the following exercises, use the graph of the one-to-one function shown in Figure 12. 

Figure 12 

29 . Sketch the graph of 30 . Find  31 . If the complete graph of 
is shown, find the domain 
of 

Access for free at openstax.org



3.7 • Inverse Functions     301

32 . If the complete graph of 
is shown, find the range of 

Numeric 

For the following exercises, evaluate or solve, assuming that the function  is one-to-one. 

33 . If  find  34 . If  find  35 . If  find 

36 . If  find 

For the following exercises, use the values listed in Table 6 to evaluate or solve. 

0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 

8 0 7 4 2 6 5 3 9 1 

Table 6 

37 . Find  38 . Solve  39 . Find 

40 . Solve  41 . Use the tabular representation 
of  in Table 7 to create a table 
for 

3 6 9 13 14 

1 4 7 12 16 

Table 7 

Technology 

For the following exercises, find the inverse function. Then, graph the function and its inverse. 

42 .  43 . 44 . Find the inverse function of 
 Use a 

graphing utility to find its 
domain and range. Write 
the domain and range in 
interval notation. 



302     3 • Functions

Real-World Applications 

45 . To convert from  degrees  46 . The circumference  of a  47 . A car travels at a constant 
Celsius to  degrees circle is a function of its speed of 50 miles per hour. 
Fahrenheit, we use the radius given by The distance the car travels 
formula Express the radius of a in miles is a function of 
Find the inverse function, if circle as a function of its time,  in hours given by 
it exists, and explain its circumference. Call this  Find the inverse 
meaning. function  Find function by expressing the 

and interpret its meaning. time of travel in terms of 
the distance traveled. Call 
this function  Find 

 and interpret its 
meaning. 

Access for free at openstax.org



3 • Chapter Review     303

Chapter Review 
Key Terms 
absolute maximum  the greatest value of a function over an interval 
absolute minimum  the lowest value of a function over an interval 
average rate of change  the difference in the output values of a function found for two values of the input divided by 

the difference between the inputs 
composite function  the new function formed by function composition, when the output of one function is used as the 

input of another 
decreasing function  a function is decreasing in some open interval if  for any two input values  and  in 

the given interval where 
dependent variable  an output variable 
domain  the set of all possible input values for a relation 
even function  a function whose graph is unchanged by horizontal reflection,  and is symmetric about 

the  axis 
function  a relation in which each input value yields a unique output value 
horizontal compression  a transformation that compresses a function’s graph horizontally, by multiplying the input by 

a constant 
horizontal line test  a method of testing whether a function is one-to-one by determining whether any horizontal line 

intersects the graph more than once 
horizontal reflection  a transformation that reflects a function’s graph across the y-axis by multiplying the input by 
horizontal shift  a transformation that shifts a function’s graph left or right by adding a positive or negative constant to 

the input 
horizontal stretch  a transformation that stretches a function’s graph horizontally by multiplying the input by a 

constant 
increasing function  a function is increasing in some open interval if  for any two input values  and  in 

the given interval where 
independent variable  an input variable 
input  each object or value in a domain that relates to another object or value by a relationship known as a function 
interval notation  a method of describing a set that includes all numbers between a lower limit and an upper limit; the 

lower and upper values are listed between brackets or parentheses, a square bracket indicating inclusion in the set, 
and a parenthesis indicating exclusion 

inverse function  for any one-to-one function  the inverse is a function  such that  for all 
in the domain of  this also implies that  for all  in the domain of 

local extrema  collectively, all of a function's local maxima and minima 
local maximum  a value of the input where a function changes from increasing to decreasing as the input value 

increases. 
local minimum  a value of the input where a function changes from decreasing to increasing as the input value 

increases. 
odd function  a function whose graph is unchanged by combined horizontal and vertical reflection, 

and is symmetric about the origin 
one-to-one function  a function for which each value of the output is associated with a unique input value 
output  each object or value in the range that is produced when an input value is entered into a function 
piecewise function  a function in which more than one formula is used to define the output 
range  the set of output values that result from the input values in a relation 
rate of change  the change of an output quantity relative to the change of the input quantity 
relation  a set of ordered pairs 
set-builder notation  a method of describing a set by a rule that all of its members obey; it takes the form 

vertical compression  a function transformation that compresses the function’s graph vertically by multiplying the 
output by a constant 

vertical line test  a method of testing whether a graph represents a function by determining whether a vertical line 
intersects the graph no more than once 

vertical reflection  a transformation that reflects a function’s graph across the x-axis by multiplying the output by 
vertical shift  a transformation that shifts a function’s graph up or down by adding a positive or negative constant to 

the output 
vertical stretch  a transformation that stretches a function’s graph vertically by multiplying the output by a constant 



304     3 • Chapter Review

Key Equations 

Constant function  where  is a constant 

Identity function 

Absolute value function 

Quadratic function 

Cubic function 

Reciprocal function 

Reciprocal squared function 

Square root function 

Cube root function 

Average rate of change 

Composite function 

Vertical shift  (up for  ) 

Horizontal shift  (right for  ) 

Vertical reflection 

Horizontal reflection 

Vertical stretch  (  ) 

Vertical compression  

Horizontal stretch  

Horizontal compression.  (  ) 

Key Concepts 
3.1 Functions and Function Notation 

• A relation is a set of ordered pairs. A function is a specific type of relation in which each domain value, or input, 
leads to exactly one range value, or output. See Example 1 and Example 2. 

• Function notation is a shorthand method for relating the input to the output in the form  See Example 3 
and Example 4. 

• In tabular form, a function can be represented by rows or columns that relate to input and output values. See 

Access for free at openstax.org



3 • Chapter Review     305

Example 5. 
• To evaluate a function, we determine an output value for a corresponding input value. Algebraic forms of a function 

can be evaluated by replacing the input variable with a given value. See Example 6 and Example 7. 
• To solve for a specific function value, we determine the input values that yield the specific output value. See Example 

8. 
• An algebraic form of a function can be written from an equation. See Example 9 and Example 10. 
• Input and output values of a function can be identified from a table. See Example 11. 
• Relating input values to output values on a graph is another way to evaluate a function. See Example 12. 
• A function is one-to-one if each output value corresponds to only one input value. See Example 13. 
• A graph represents a function if any vertical line drawn on the graph intersects the graph at no more than one 

point. See Example 14. 
• The graph of a one-to-one function passes the horizontal line test. See Example 15. 

3.2 Domain and Range 
• The domain of a function includes all real input values that would not cause us to attempt an undefined 

mathematical operation, such as dividing by zero or taking the square root of a negative number. 
• The domain of a function can be determined by listing the input values of a set of ordered pairs. See Example 1. 
• The domain of a function can also be determined by identifying the input values of a function written as an 

equation. See Example 2, Example 3, and Example 4. 
• Interval values represented on a number line can be described using inequality notation, set-builder notation, and 

interval notation. See Example 5. 
• For many functions, the domain and range can be determined from a graph. See Example 6 and Example 7. 
• An understanding of toolkit functions can be used to find the domain and range of related functions. See Example 8, 

Example 9, and Example 10. 
• A piecewise function is described by more than one formula. See Example 11 and Example 12. 
• A piecewise function can be graphed using each algebraic formula on its assigned subdomain. See Example 13. 

3.3 Rates of Change and Behavior of Graphs 
• A rate of change relates a change in an output quantity to a change in an input quantity. The average rate of change 

is determined using only the beginning and ending data. See Example 1. 
• Identifying points that mark the interval on a graph can be used to find the average rate of change. See Example 2. 
• Comparing pairs of input and output values in a table can also be used to find the average rate of change. See 

Example 3. 
• An average rate of change can also be computed by determining the function values at the endpoints of an interval 

described by a formula. See Example 4 and Example 5. 
• The average rate of change can sometimes be determined as an expression. See Example 6. 
• A function is increasing where its rate of change is positive and decreasing where its rate of change is negative. See 

Example 7. 
• A local maximum is where a function changes from increasing to decreasing and has an output value larger (more 

positive or less negative) than output values at neighboring input values. 
• A local minimum is where the function changes from decreasing to increasing (as the input increases) and has an 

output value smaller (more negative or less positive) than output values at neighboring input values. 
• Minima and maxima are also called extrema. 
• We can find local extrema from a graph. See Example 8 and Example 9. 
• The highest and lowest points on a graph indicate the maxima and minima. See Example 10. 

3.4 Composition of Functions 
• We can perform algebraic operations on functions. See Example 1. 
• When functions are composed, the output of the first (inner) function becomes the input of the second (outer) 

function. 
• The function produced by composing two functions is a composite function. See Example 2 and Example 3. 
• The order of function composition must be considered when interpreting the meaning of composite functions. See 

Example 4. 
• A composite function can be evaluated by evaluating the inner function using the given input value and then 

evaluating the outer function taking as its input the output of the inner function. 
• A composite function can be evaluated from a table. See Example 5. 
• A composite function can be evaluated from a graph. See Example 6. 
• A composite function can be evaluated from a formula. See Example 7. 



306     3 • Chapter Review

• The domain of a composite function consists of those inputs in the domain of the inner function that correspond to 
outputs of the inner function that are in the domain of the outer function. See Example 8 and Example 9. 

• Just as functions can be combined to form a composite function, composite functions can be decomposed into 
simpler functions. 

• Functions can often be decomposed in more than one way. See Example 10. 

3.5 Transformation of Functions 
• A function can be shifted vertically by adding a constant to the output. See Example 1 and Example 2. 
• A function can be shifted horizontally by adding a constant to the input. See Example 3, Example 4, and Example 5. 
• Relating the shift to the context of a problem makes it possible to compare and interpret vertical and horizontal 

shifts. See Example 6. 
• Vertical and horizontal shifts are often combined. See Example 7 and Example 8. 
• A vertical reflection reflects a graph about the  axis. A graph can be reflected vertically by multiplying the output 

by –1. 
• A horizontal reflection reflects a graph about the  axis. A graph can be reflected horizontally by multiplying the 

input by –1. 
• A graph can be reflected both vertically and horizontally. The order in which the reflections are applied does not 

affect the final graph. See Example 9. 
• A function presented in tabular form can also be reflected by multiplying the values in the input and output rows or 

columns accordingly. See Example 10. 
• A function presented as an equation can be reflected by applying transformations one at a time. See Example 11. 
• Even functions are symmetric about the  axis, whereas odd functions are symmetric about the origin. 
• Even functions satisfy the condition 
• Odd functions satisfy the condition 
• A function can be odd, even, or neither. See Example 12. 
• A function can be compressed or stretched vertically by multiplying the output by a constant. See Example 13, 

Example 14, and Example 15. 
• A function can be compressed or stretched horizontally by multiplying the input by a constant. See Example 16, 

Example 17, and Example 18. 
• The order in which different transformations are applied does affect the final function. Both vertical and horizontal 

transformations must be applied in the order given. However, a vertical transformation may be combined with a 
horizontal transformation in any order. See Example 19 and Example 20. 

3.6 Absolute Value Functions 
• Applied problems, such as ranges of possible values, can also be solved using the absolute value function. See 

Example 1. 
• The graph of the absolute value function resembles a letter V. It has a corner point at which the graph changes 

direction. See Example 2. 
• In an absolute value equation, an unknown variable is the input of an absolute value function. 
• If the absolute value of an expression is set equal to a positive number, expect two solutions for the unknown 

variable. See Example 3. 

3.7 Inverse Functions 
• If  is the inverse of  then  See Example 1, Example 2, and Example 3. 
• Only some of the toolkit functions have an inverse. See Example 4. 
• For a function to have an inverse, it must be one-to-one (pass the horizontal line test). 
• A function that is not one-to-one over its entire domain may be one-to-one on part of its domain. 
• For a tabular function, exchange the input and output rows to obtain the inverse. See Example 5. 
• The inverse of a function can be determined at specific points on its graph. See Example 6. 
• To find the inverse of a formula, solve the equation  for  as a function of  Then exchange the labels 

and  See Example 7, Example 8, and Example 9. 
• The graph of an inverse function is the reflection of the graph of the original function across the line  See 

Example 10. 

Access for free at openstax.org



3 • Exercises     307

Exercises 
Review Exercises 
Functions and Function Notation 
For the following exercises, determine whether the relation is a function. 

1 .  2 .  3 .  for  the 
independent variable and 
the dependent variable 

4 . Is the graph in Figure 1 a 
function? 

Figure 1 

For the following exercises, evaluate 

5 .  6 . 

For the following exercises, determine whether the functions are one-to-one. 
7 .  8 . 

For the following exercises, use the vertical line test to determine if the relation whose graph is provided is a function. 
9 .  10 . 



308     3 • Exercises

11 . 

For the following exercises, graph the functions. 

12 .  13 . 

For the following exercises, use Figure 2 to approximate the values. 

Figure 2 
14 .  15 .  16 . If  then solve for 

17 . If  then solve for 

For the following exercises, use the function  to find the values in simplest form. 

18 .  19 . 

Domain and Range 

For the following exercises, find the domain of each function, expressing answers using interval notation. 

20 .  21 .  22 . 

23 . Graph this piecewise 
function: 

Access for free at openstax.org



3 • Exercises     309

Rates of Change and Behavior of Graphs 

For the following exercises, find the average rate of change of the functions from 

24 .  25 .  26 . 

For the following exercises, use the graphs to determine the intervals on which the functions are increasing, decreasing, 
or constant. 
27 . 28 . 

29 . 30 . Find the local minimum of 
the function graphed in 
Exercise 3.27. 



310     3 • Exercises

31 . Find the local extrema for  32 . For the graph in Figure 3,  33 . Find the absolute maximum of the 
the function graphed in the domain of the function function graphed in Figure 3. 
Exercise 3.28. is  The range is 

 Find the 
absolute minimum of the 
function on this interval. 

Figure 3 

Composition of Functions 

For the following exercises, find  and  for each pair of functions. 

34 .  35 .  36 . 

37 .  38 . 

For the following exercises, find  and the domain for  for each pair of functions. 

39 .  40 .  41 . 

42 . 

For the following exercises, express each function  as a composition of two functions  and  where 

43 .  44 . 

Transformation of Functions 

For the following exercises, sketch a graph of the given function. 

45 . 46 .  47 . 

48 .  49 . 50 . 

51 . 52 . 

For the following exercises, sketch the graph of the function  if the graph of the function  is shown in Figure 4. 

Figure 4 

Access for free at openstax.org



3 • Exercises     311

53 . 54 . 

For the following exercises, write the equation for the standard function represented by each of the graphs below. 
55 . 56 . 

For the following exercises, determine whether each function below is even, odd, or neither. 

57 .  58 .  59 . 

For the following exercises, analyze the graph and determine whether the graphed function is even, odd, or neither. 
60 . 61 . 62 . 

Absolute Value Functions 

For the following exercises, write an equation for the transformation of 
63 . 64 . 65 . 

For the following exercises, graph the absolute value function. 
66 .  67 . 68 . 



312     3 • Exercises

Inverse Functions 

For the following exercises, find  for each function. 
69 . 70 . 

For the following exercise, find a domain on which the function  is one-to-one and non-decreasing. Write the domain in 
interval notation. Then find the inverse of  restricted to that domain. 

71 . 72 . Given  and 

ⓐ Find  and 

ⓑ What does the answer 
tell us about the 
relationship between 
and 

For the following exercises, use a graphing utility to determine whether each function is one-to-one. 

73 . 74 . 75 . If  find 

76 . If  find 

Practice Test 
For the following exercises, determine whether each of the following relations is a function. 
1 .  2 . 

For the following exercises, evaluate the function  at the given input. 
3 .  4 .  5 . Show that the function 

 is 
not one-to-one. 

6 . Write the domain of the  7 . Given  find  8 . Graph the function 
function  in  in simplest 
interval notation. form. 

9 . Find the average rate of 
change of the function 

 by 
finding  in simplest 
form. 

For the following exercises, use the functions  to find the composite functions. 

10 .  11 .  12 . Express 
 as a 

composition of two 
functions,  and  where 

For the following exercises, graph the functions by translating, stretching, and/or compressing a toolkit function. 

13 . 14 . 

For the following exercises, determine whether the functions are even, odd, or neither. 

15 .  16 .  17 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



3 • Exercises     313

18 . Graph the absolute value 
function 

For the following exercises, find the inverse of the function. 

19 .  20 . 

For the following exercises, use the graph of  shown in Figure 1. 

Figure 1 
21 . On what intervals is the  22 . On what intervals is the  23 . Approximate the local 

function increasing? function decreasing? minimum of the function. 
Express the answer as an 
ordered pair. The ordered 
pair should include both 
the  value as well as the 

 value. 
24 . Approximate the local 

maximum of the function. 
Express the answer as an 
ordered pair. The ordered 
pair should include both 
the  value as well as the 

 value. 

For the following exercises, use the graph of the piecewise function shown in Figure 2. 

Figure 2 



314     3 • Exercises

25 . Find  26 . Find  27 . Write an equation for the 
piecewise function. 

For the following exercises, use the values listed in Table 1. 

0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 

1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 

Table 1 

28 . Find  29 . Solve the equation  30 . Is the graph increasing or 
decreasing on its domain? 

31 . Is the function represented  32 . Find  33 . Given 
by the graph one-to-one? find 

Access for free at openstax.org



4 • Introduction to Linear Functions          315

4 LINEAR FUNCTIONS 

A bamboo forest in China (credit: "JFXie"/Flickr) 

Chapter Outline 
4.1 Linear Functions 
4.2 Modeling with Linear Functions 
4.3 Fitting Linear Models to Data 

Introduction to Linear Functions 
Imagine placing a plant in the ground one day and finding that it has doubled its height just a few days later. Although it 
may seem incredible, this can happen with certain types of bamboo species. These members of the grass family are the 
fastest-growing plants in the world. One species of bamboo has been observed to grow nearly 1.5 inches every hour. 1  In 
a twenty-four hour period, this bamboo plant grows about 36 inches, or an incredible 3 feet! A constant rate of change, 
such as the growth cycle of this bamboo plant, is a linear function. 
Recall from Functions and Function Notation that a function is a relation that assigns to every element in the domain 
exactly one element in the range. Linear functions are a specific type of function that can be used to model many real-
world applications, such as plant growth over time. In this chapter, we will explore linear functions, their graphs, and how 
to relate them to data. 

4.1 Linear Functions 
Learning Objectives 
In this section, you will: 

Represent a linear function. 
Determine whether a linear function is increasing, decreasing, or constant. 
Interpret slope as a rate of change. 
Write and interpret an equation for a linear function. 
Graph linear functions. 
Determine whether lines are parallel or perpendicular. 
Write the equation of a line parallel or perpendicular to a given line. 

1 http://www.guinnessworldrecords.com/records-3000/fastest-growing-plant/ 



316     4 • Linear Functions

Figure 1 Shanghai MagLev Train (credit: "kanegen"/Flickr) 
Just as with the growth of a bamboo plant, there are many situations that involve constant change over time. Consider, 
for example, the first commercial maglev train in the world, the Shanghai MagLev Train (Figure 1). It carries passengers 
comfortably for a 30-kilometer trip from the airport to the subway station in only eight minutes2 . 
Suppose a maglev train travels a long distance, and maintains a constant speed of 83 meters per second for a period of 
time once it is 250 meters from the station. How can we analyze the train’s distance from the station as a function of 
time? In this section, we will investigate a kind of function that is useful for this purpose, and use it to investigate real-
world situations such as the train’s distance from the station at a given point in time. 

Representing Linear Functions 
The function describing the train’s motion is a linear function, which is defined as a function with a constant rate of 
change. This is a polynomial of degree 1. There are several ways to represent a linear function, including word form, 
function notation, tabular form, and graphical form. We will describe the train’s motion as a function using each method. 

Representing a Linear Function in Word Form 
Let’s begin by describing the linear function in words. For the train problem we just considered, the following word 
sentence may be used to describe the function relationship. 

• The train’s distance from the station is a function of the time during which the train moves at a constant speed plus 
its original distance from the station when it began moving at constant speed. 

The speed is the rate of change. Recall that a rate of change is a measure of how quickly the dependent variable changes 
with respect to the independent variable. The rate of change for this example is constant, which means that it is the 
same for each input value. As the time (input) increases by 1 second, the corresponding distance (output) increases by 83 
meters. The train began moving at this constant speed at a distance of 250 meters from the station. 

Representing a Linear Function in Function Notation 
Another approach to representing linear functions is by using function notation. One example of function notation is an 
equation written in the slope-intercept form of a line, where  is the input value,  is the rate of change, and  is the 
initial value of the dependent variable. 

In the example of the train, we might use the notation  where the total distance  is a function of the time  The 
rate,  is 83 meters per second. The initial value of the dependent variable  is the original distance from the station, 
250 meters. We can write a generalized equation to represent the motion of the train. 

Representing a Linear Function in Tabular Form 
A third method of representing a linear function is through the use of a table. The relationship between the distance 
from the station and the time is represented in Figure 2. From the table, we can see that the distance changes by 83 
meters for every 1 second increase in time. 

2 http://www.chinahighlights.com/shanghai/transportation/maglev-train.htm 

Access for free at openstax.org



4.1 • Linear Functions     317

Figure 2 Tabular representation of the function  showing selected input and output values 

 Q&A Can the input in the previous example be any real number? 

No. The input represents time so while nonnegative rational and irrational numbers are possible, 
negative real numbers are not possible for this example. The input consists of non-negative real 
numbers. 

Representing a Linear Function in Graphical Form 
Another way to represent linear functions is visually, using a graph. We can use the function relationship from above, 

 to draw a graph as represented in Figure 3. Notice the graph is a line. When we plot a linear function, 
the graph is always a line. 
The rate of change, which is constant, determines the slant, or slope of the line. The point at which the input value is 
zero is the vertical intercept, or y-intercept, of the line. We can see from the graph that the y-intercept in the train 
example we just saw is  and represents the distance of the train from the station when it began moving at a 
constant speed. 

Figure 3 The graph of  . Graphs of linear functions are lines because the rate of change is constant. 
Notice that the graph of the train example is restricted, but this is not always the case. Consider the graph of the line 

 Ask yourself what numbers can be input to the function. In other words, what is the domain of the 
function? The domain is comprised of all real numbers because any number may be doubled, and then have one added 
to the product. 

Linear Function 

A linear function is a function whose graph is a line. Linear functions can be written in the slope-intercept form of a 
line 

where  is the initial or starting value of the function (when input,  ), and  is the constant rate of change, or 
slope of the function. The y-intercept is at 

EXAMPLE 1 

Using a Linear Function to Find the Pressure on a Diver 
The pressure,  in pounds per square inch (PSI) on the diver in Figure 4 depends upon her depth below the water 



318     4 • Linear Functions

surface,  in feet. This relationship may be modeled by the equation,  Restate this function in 
words. 

Figure 4 (credit: Ilse Reijs and Jan-Noud Hutten) 

Solution 
To restate the function in words, we need to describe each part of the equation. The pressure as a function of depth 
equals four hundred thirty-four thousandths times depth plus fourteen and six hundred ninety-six thousandths. 

Analysis 
The initial value, 14.696, is the pressure in PSI on the diver at a depth of 0 feet, which is the surface of the water. The rate 
of change, or slope, is 0.434 PSI per foot. This tells us that the pressure on the diver increases 0.434 PSI for each foot her 
depth increases. 

Determining Whether a Linear Function Is Increasing, Decreasing, or Constant 
The linear functions we used in the two previous examples increased over time, but not every linear function does. A 
linear function may be increasing, decreasing, or constant. For an increasing function, as with the train example, the 
output values increase as the input values increase. The graph of an increasing function has a positive slope. A line with 
a positive slope slants upward from left to right as in Figure 5(a). For a decreasing function, the slope is negative. The 
output values decrease as the input values increase. A line with a negative slope slants downward from left to right as in 
Figure 5(b). If the function is constant, the output values are the same for all input values so the slope is zero. A line with 
a slope of zero is horizontal as in Figure 5(c). 

Figure 5 

Access for free at openstax.org



4.1 • Linear Functions     319

Increasing and Decreasing Functions 

The slope determines if the function is an increasing linear function, a decreasing linear function, or a constant 
function. 

 is an increasing function if 
 is a decreasing function if 
 is a constant function if 

EXAMPLE 2 

Deciding Whether a Function Is Increasing, Decreasing, or Constant 
Studies from the early 2010s indicated that teens sent about 60 texts a day, while more recent data indicates much 
higher messaging rates among all users, particularly considering the various apps with which people can 
communicate.3 . For each of the following scenarios, find the linear function that describes the relationship between the 
input value and the output value. Then, determine whether the graph of the function is increasing, decreasing, or 
constant. 

ⓐ The total number of texts a teen sends is considered a function of time in days. The input is the number of days, 
and output is the total number of texts sent. 
ⓑ A person has a limit of 500 texts per month in their data plan. The input is the number of days, and output is the 
total number of texts remaining for the month. 
ⓒ A person has an unlimited number of texts in their data plan for a cost of $50 per month. The input is the number 
of days, and output is the total cost of texting each month. 

Solution 
Analyze each function. 

ⓐ The function can be represented as  where  is the number of days. The slope, 60, is positive so the 
function is increasing. This makes sense because the total number of texts increases with each day. 
ⓑ The function can be represented as  where  is the number of days. In this case, the slope is 
negative so the function is decreasing. This makes sense because the number of texts remaining decreases each day 
and this function represents the number of texts remaining in the data plan after  days. 
ⓒ The cost function can be represented as  because the number of days does not affect the total cost. The 
slope is 0 so the function is constant. 

Interpreting Slope as a Rate of Change 
In the examples we have seen so far, the slope was provided to us. However, we often need to calculate the slope given 
input and output values. Recall that given two values for the input,  and  and two corresponding values for the 
output,  and  —which can be represented by a set of points,  and  —we can calculate the slope 

Note that in function notation we can obtain two corresponding values for the output  and  for the function 
 and  so we could equivalently write 

Figure 6 indicates how the slope of the line between the points,  and  is calculated. Recall that the slope 
measures steepness, or slant. The greater the absolute value of the slope, the steeper the slant is. 

3 http://www.cbsnews.com/8301-501465_162-57400228-501465/teens-are-sending-60-texts-a-day-study-says/ 



320     4 • Linear Functions

Figure 6 The slope of a function is calculated by the change in  divided by the change in  It does not matter which 
coordinate is used as the  and which is the  as long as each calculation is started with the elements from 
the same coordinate pair. 

 Q&A Are the units for slope always 

Yes. Think of the units as the change of output value for each unit of change in input value. An example 
of slope could be miles per hour or dollars per day. Notice the units appear as a ratio of units for the 
output per units for the input. 

Calculate Slope 

The slope, or rate of change, of a function  can be calculated according to the following: 

where  and  are input values,  and  are output values. 

...
HOW TO 

Given two points from a linear function, calculate and interpret the slope. 

1. Determine the units for output and input values. 
2. Calculate the change of output values and change of input values. 
3. Interpret the slope as the change in output values per unit of the input value. 

EXAMPLE 3 

Finding the Slope of a Linear Function 
If  is a linear function, and  and  are points on the line, find the slope. Is this function increasing or 
decreasing? 

Solution 
The coordinate pairs are  and  To find the rate of change, we divide the change in output by the change in 
input. 

We could also write the slope as  The function is increasing because 

Access for free at openstax.org



4.1 • Linear Functions     321

Analysis 
As noted earlier, the order in which we write the points does not matter when we compute the slope of the line as long 
as the first output value, or y-coordinate, used corresponds with the first input value, or x-coordinate, used. Note that if 
we had reversed them, we would have obtained the same slope. 

 TRY IT #1 If  is a linear function, and  and  are points on the line, find the slope. Is this 
function increasing or decreasing? 

EXAMPLE 4 

Finding the Population Change from a Linear Function 
The population of a city increased from 23,400 to 27,800 between 2008 and 2012. Find the change of population per year 
if we assume the change was constant from 2008 to 2012. 

Solution 
The rate of change relates the change in population to the change in time. The population increased by 

 people over the four-year time interval. To find the rate of change, divide the change in the 
number of people by the number of years. 

So the population increased by 1,100 people per year. 

Analysis 
Because we are told that the population increased, we would expect the slope to be positive. This positive slope we 
calculated is therefore reasonable. 

 TRY IT #2 The population of a small town increased from 1,442 to 1,868 between 2009 and 2012. Find the 
change of population per year if we assume the change was constant from 2009 to 2012. 

Writing and Interpreting an Equation for a Linear Function 
Recall from Equations and Inequalities that we wrote equations in both the slope-intercept form and the point-slope 
form. Now we can choose which method to use to write equations for linear functions based on the information we are 
given. That information may be provided in the form of a graph, a point and a slope, two points, and so on. Look at the 
graph of the function  in Figure 7. 

Figure 7 



322     4 • Linear Functions

We are not given the slope of the line, but we can choose any two points on the line to find the slope. Let’s choose 
and 

Now we can substitute the slope and the coordinates of one of the points into the point-slope form. 

If we want to rewrite the equation in the slope-intercept form, we would find 

If we want to find the slope-intercept form without first writing the point-slope form, we could have recognized that the 
line crosses the y-axis when the output value is 7. Therefore,  We now have the initial value  and the slope  so 
we can substitute  and  into the slope-intercept form of a line. 

So the function is  and the linear equation would be 

...
HOW TO 

Given the graph of a linear function, write an equation to represent the function. 

1. Identify two points on the line. 
2. Use the two points to calculate the slope. 
3. Determine where the line crosses the y-axis to identify the y-intercept by visual inspection. 
4. Substitute the slope and y-intercept into the slope-intercept form of a line equation. 

EXAMPLE 5 

Writing an Equation for a Linear Function 
Write an equation for a linear function given a graph of  shown in Figure 8. 

Access for free at openstax.org



4.1 • Linear Functions     323

Figure 8 

Solution 
Identify two points on the line, such as  and  Use the points to calculate the slope. 

Substitute the slope and the coordinates of one of the points into the point-slope form. 

We can use algebra to rewrite the equation in the slope-intercept form. 

Analysis 
This makes sense because we can see from Figure 9 that the line crosses the y-axis at the point  which is the 
y-intercept, so 



324     4 • Linear Functions

Figure 9 

EXAMPLE 6 

Writing an Equation for a Linear Cost Function 
Suppose Ben starts a company in which he incurs a fixed cost of $1,250 per month for the overhead, which includes his 
office rent. His production costs are $37.50 per item. Write a linear function  where  is the cost for  items 
produced in a given month. 

Solution 
The fixed cost is present every month, $1,250. The costs that can vary include the cost to produce each item, which is 
$37.50. The variable cost, called the marginal cost, is represented by  The cost Ben incurs is the sum of these two 
costs, represented by 

Analysis 
If Ben produces 100 items in a month, his monthly cost is found by substituting 100 for 

So his monthly cost would be $5,000. 

EXAMPLE 7 

Writing an Equation for a Linear Function Given Two Points 
If  is a linear function, with  and  find an equation for the function in slope-intercept form. 

Solution 
We can write the given points using coordinates. 

We can then use the points to calculate the slope. 

Substitute the slope and the coordinates of one of the points into the point-slope form. 

Access for free at openstax.org



4.1 • Linear Functions     325

We can use algebra to rewrite the equation in the slope-intercept form. 

 TRY IT #3 If  is a linear function, with  and  write an equation for the function in 
slope-intercept form. 

Modeling Real-World Problems with Linear Functions 
In the real world, problems are not always explicitly stated in terms of a function or represented with a graph. 
Fortunately, we can analyze the problem by first representing it as a linear function and then interpreting the 
components of the function. As long as we know, or can figure out, the initial value and the rate of change of a linear 
function, we can solve many different kinds of real-world problems. 

...
HOW TO 

Given a linear function  and the initial value and rate of change, evaluate 

1. Determine the initial value and the rate of change (slope). 
2. Substitute the values into 
3. Evaluate the function at 

EXAMPLE 8 

Using a Linear Function to Determine the Number of Songs in a Music Collection 
Marcus currently has 200 songs in his music collection. Every month, he adds 15 new songs. Write a formula for the 
number of songs,  in his collection as a function of time,  the number of months. How many songs will he own at the 
end of one year? 

Solution 
The initial value for this function is 200 because he currently owns 200 songs, so  which means that 
The number of songs increases by 15 songs per month, so the rate of change is 15 songs per month. Therefore we know 
that  We can substitute the initial value and the rate of change into the slope-intercept form of a line. 

Figure 10 
We can write the formula 
With this formula, we can then predict how many songs Marcus will have at the end of one year (12 months). In other 
words, we can evaluate the function at 



326     4 • Linear Functions

Marcus will have 380 songs in 12 months. 

Analysis 
Notice that N is an increasing linear function. As the input (the number of months) increases, the output (number of 
songs) increases as well. 

EXAMPLE 9 

Using a Linear Function to Calculate Salary Based on Commission 
Working as an insurance salesperson, Ilya earns a base salary plus a commission on each new policy. Therefore, Ilya’s 
weekly income  depends on the number of new policies,  he sells during the week. Last week he sold 3 new policies, 
and earned $760 for the week. The week before, he sold 5 new policies and earned $920. Find an equation for  and 
interpret the meaning of the components of the equation. 

Solution 
The given information gives us two input-output pairs:  and  We start by finding the rate of change. 

Keeping track of units can help us interpret this quantity. Income increased by $160 when the number of policies 
increased by 2, so the rate of change is $80 per policy. Therefore, Ilya earns a commission of $80 for each policy sold 
during the week. 
We can then solve for the initial value. 

 

The value of  is the starting value for the function and represents Ilya’s income when  or when no new policies are 
sold. We can interpret this as Ilya’s base salary for the week, which does not depend upon the number of policies sold. 
We can now write the final equation. 

Our final interpretation is that Ilya’s base salary is $520 per week and he earns an additional $80 commission for each 
policy sold. 

EXAMPLE 10 

Using Tabular Form to Write an Equation for a Linear Function 
Table 1 relates the number of rats in a population to time, in weeks. Use the table to write a linear equation. 

number of weeks, w 0 2 4 6 

number of rats, P(w) 1000 1080 1160 1240 

Table 1 

Solution 
We can see from the table that the initial value for the number of rats is 1000, so 
Rather than solving for  we can tell from looking at the table that the population increases by 80 for every 2 weeks that 

Access for free at openstax.org



4.1 • Linear Functions     327

pass. This means that the rate of change is 80 rats per 2 weeks, which can be simplified to 40 rats per week. 

If we did not notice the rate of change from the table we could still solve for the slope using any two points from the 
table. For example, using  and 

 Q&A Is the initial value always provided in a table of values like Table 1? 

No. Sometimes the initial value is provided in a table of values, but sometimes it is not. If you see an 
input of 0, then the initial value would be the corresponding output. If the initial value is not provided 
because there is no value of input on the table equal to 0, find the slope, substitute one coordinate pair 
and the slope into  and solve for 

 TRY IT #4 A new plant food was introduced to a young tree to test its effect on the height of the tree. Table 2 
shows the height of the tree, in feet,  months since the measurements began. Write a linear 
function,  where  is the number of months since the start of the experiment. 

x 0 2 4 8 12 

H(x) 12.5 13.5 14.5 16.5 18.5 

Table 2 

Graphing Linear Functions 
Now that we’ve seen and interpreted graphs of linear functions, let’s take a look at how to create the graphs. There are 
three basic methods of graphing linear functions. The first is by plotting points and then drawing a line through the 
points. The second is by using the y-intercept and slope. And the third method is by using transformations of the identity 
function 

Graphing a Function by Plotting Points 
To find points of a function, we can choose input values, evaluate the function at these input values, and calculate output 
values. The input values and corresponding output values form coordinate pairs. We then plot the coordinate pairs on a 
grid. In general, we should evaluate the function at a minimum of two inputs in order to find at least two points on the 
graph. For example, given the function,  we might use the input values 1 and 2. Evaluating the function for an 
input value of 1 yields an output value of 2, which is represented by the point  Evaluating the function for an input 
value of 2 yields an output value of 4, which is represented by the point  Choosing three points is often advisable 
because if all three points do not fall on the same line, we know we made an error. 

...
HOW TO 

Given a linear function, graph by plotting points. 

1. Choose a minimum of two input values. 
2. Evaluate the function at each input value. 
3. Use the resulting output values to identify coordinate pairs. 
4. Plot the coordinate pairs on a grid. 
5. Draw a line through the points. 



328     4 • Linear Functions

EXAMPLE 11 

Graphing by Plotting Points 
Graph  by plotting points. 

Solution 
Begin by choosing input values. This function includes a fraction with a denominator of 3, so let’s choose multiples of 3 
as input values. We will choose 0, 3, and 6. 
Evaluate the function at each input value, and use the output value to identify coordinate pairs. 

Plot the coordinate pairs and draw a line through the points. Figure 11 represents the graph of the function 

Figure 11 The graph of the linear function 

Analysis 
The graph of the function is a line as expected for a linear function. In addition, the graph has a downward slant, which 
indicates a negative slope. This is also expected from the negative, constant rate of change in the equation for the 
function. 

 TRY IT #5 Graph  by plotting points. 

Graphing a Function Using y-intercept and Slope 
Another way to graph linear functions is by using specific characteristics of the function rather than plotting points. The 
first characteristic is its y-intercept, which is the point at which the input value is zero. To find the y-intercept, we can set 

 in the equation. 
The other characteristic of the linear function is its slope. 
Let’s consider the following function. 

The slope is  Because the slope is positive, we know the graph will slant upward from left to right. The y-intercept is 
the point on the graph when  The graph crosses the y-axis at  Now we know the slope and the y-intercept. 
We can begin graphing by plotting the point  We know that the slope is the change in the y-coordinate over the 
change in the x-coordinate. This is commonly referred to as rise over run,  From our example, we have 
which means that the rise is 1 and the run is 2. So starting from our y-intercept  we can rise 1 and then run 2, or 

Access for free at openstax.org



4.1 • Linear Functions     329

run 2 and then rise 1. We repeat until we have a few points, and then we draw a line through the points as shown in 
Figure 12. 

Figure 12 

Graphical Interpretation of a Linear Function 

In the equation 

•  is the y-intercept of the graph and indicates the point  at which the graph crosses the y-axis. 
•  is the slope of the line and indicates the vertical displacement (rise) and horizontal displacement (run) between 

each successive pair of points. Recall the formula for the slope: 

 Q&A Do all linear functions have y-intercepts? 

Yes. All linear functions cross the y-axis and therefore have y-intercepts. (Note: A vertical line is parallel 
to the y-axis does not have a y-intercept, but it is not a function.) 

...
HOW TO 

Given the equation for a linear function, graph the function using the y-intercept and slope. 

1. Evaluate the function at an input value of zero to find the y-intercept. 
2. Identify the slope as the rate of change of the input value. 
3. Plot the point represented by the y-intercept. 
4. Use  to determine at least two more points on the line. 
5. Sketch the line that passes through the points. 

EXAMPLE 12 

Graphing by Using the y-intercept and Slope 
Graph  using the y-intercept and slope. 

Solution 
Evaluate the function at  to find the y-intercept. The output value when  is 5, so the graph will cross the y-axis 
at 

According to the equation for the function, the slope of the line is  This tells us that for each vertical decrease in the 
“rise” of  units, the “run” increases by 3 units in the horizontal direction. We can now graph the function by first 
plotting the y-intercept on the graph in Figure 13. From the initial value  we move down 2 units and to the right 3 
units. We can extend the line to the left and right by repeating, and then drawing a line through the points. 



330     4 • Linear Functions

Figure 13 Graph of  and shows how to calculate the rise over run for the slope. 

Analysis 
The graph slants downward from left to right, which means it has a negative slope as expected. 

 TRY IT #6 Find a point on the graph we drew in Example 12 that has a negative x-value. 

Graphing a Function Using Transformations 
Another option for graphing is to use a transformation of the identity function  A function may be transformed 
by a shift up, down, left, or right. A function may also be transformed using a reflection, stretch, or compression. 

Vertical Stretch or Compression 
In the equation  the  is acting as the vertical stretch or compression of the identity function. When  is 
negative, there is also a vertical reflection of the graph. Notice in Figure 14 that multiplying the equation of  by 

 stretches the graph of  by a factor of  units if  and compresses the graph of  by a factor of  units if 
 This means the larger the absolute value of  the steeper the slope. 

Figure 14 Vertical stretches and compressions and reflections on the function 

Vertical Shift 
In  the  acts as the vertical shift, moving the graph up and down without affecting the slope of the line. 
Notice in Figure 15 that adding a value of  to the equation of  shifts the graph of  a total of  units up if  is 
positive and  units down if  is negative. 

Access for free at openstax.org



4.1 • Linear Functions     331

Figure 15 This graph illustrates vertical shifts of the function 
Using vertical stretches or compressions along with vertical shifts is another way to look at identifying different types of 
linear functions. Although this may not be the easiest way to graph this type of function, it is still important to practice 
each method. 

...
HOW TO 

Given the equation of a linear function, use transformations to graph the linear function in the form 

1. Graph 
2. Vertically stretch or compress the graph by a factor 
3. Shift the graph up or down  units. 

EXAMPLE 13 

Graphing by Using Transformations 
Graph  using transformations. 

Solution 
The equation for the function shows that  so the identity function is vertically compressed by  The equation for 
the function also shows that  so the identity function is vertically shifted down 3 units. First, graph the identity 
function, and show the vertical compression as in Figure 16. 

Figure 16 The function,  compressed by a factor of  . 

Then show the vertical shift as in Figure 17. 



332     4 • Linear Functions

Figure 17 The function  shifted down 3 units. 

 TRY IT #7 Graph  using transformations. 

 Q&A In Example 15, could we have sketched the graph by reversing the order of the transformations? 

No. The order of the transformations follows the order of operations. When the function is evaluated at 
a given input, the corresponding output is calculated by following the order of operations. This is why 
we performed the compression first. For example, following the order: Let the input be 2. 

Writing the Equation for a Function from the Graph of a Line 
Earlier, we wrote the equation for a linear function from a graph. Now we can extend what we know about graphing 
linear functions to analyze graphs a little more closely. Begin by taking a look at Figure 18. We can see right away that 
the graph crosses the y-axis at the point  so this is the y-intercept. 

Figure 18 
Then we can calculate the slope by finding the rise and run. We can choose any two points, but let’s look at the point 

 To get from this point to the y-intercept, we must move up 4 units (rise) and to the right 2 units (run). So the 
slope must be 

Substituting the slope and y-intercept into the slope-intercept form of a line gives 

Access for free at openstax.org



4.1 • Linear Functions     333

...
HOW TO 

Given a graph of linear function, find the equation to describe the function. 

1. Identify the y-intercept of an equation. 
2. Choose two points to determine the slope. 
3. Substitute the y-intercept and slope into the slope-intercept form of a line. 

EXAMPLE 14 

Matching Linear Functions to Their Graphs 
Match each equation of the linear functions with one of the lines in Figure 19. 

ⓐ   ⓑ   ⓒ   ⓓ  

Figure 19 

Solution 
Analyze the information for each function. 

ⓐ This function has a slope of 2 and a y-intercept of 3. It must pass through the point (0, 3) and slant upward from 
left to right. We can use two points to find the slope, or we can compare it with the other functions listed. Function 
has the same slope, but a different y-intercept. Lines I and III have the same slant because they have the same slope. 
Line III does not pass through  so  must be represented by line I. 
ⓑ This function also has a slope of 2, but a y-intercept of  It must pass through the point  and slant 
upward from left to right. It must be represented by line III. 
ⓒ This function has a slope of –2 and a y-intercept of 3. This is the only function listed with a negative slope, so it 
must be represented by line IV because it slants downward from left to right. 
ⓓ This function has a slope of  and a y-intercept of 3. It must pass through the point (0, 3) and slant upward from 
left to right. Lines I and II pass through  but the slope of  is less than the slope of  so the line for  must be 
flatter. This function is represented by Line II. 
Now we can re-label the lines as in Figure 20. 



334     4 • Linear Functions

Figure 20 

Finding the x-intercept of a Line 
So far we have been finding the y-intercepts of a function: the point at which the graph of the function crosses the y-axis. 
Recall that a function may also have an x-intercept, which is the x-coordinate of the point where the graph of the 
function crosses the x-axis. In other words, it is the input value when the output value is zero. 
To find the x-intercept, set a function  equal to zero and solve for the value of  For example, consider the function 
shown. 

Set the function equal to 0 and solve for 

The graph of the function crosses the x-axis at the point 

 Q&A Do all linear functions have x-intercepts? 

No. However, linear functions of the form  where  is a nonzero real number are the only 
examples of linear functions with no x-intercept. For example,  is a horizontal line 5 units above 
the x-axis. This function has no x-intercepts, as shown in Figure 21. 

Access for free at openstax.org



4.1 • Linear Functions     335

Figure 21 

x-intercept 

The x-intercept of the function is value of  when  It can be solved by the equation 

EXAMPLE 15 

Finding an x-intercept 
Find the x-intercept of 

Solution 
Set the function equal to zero to solve for 

The graph crosses the x-axis at the point 

Analysis 
A graph of the function is shown in Figure 22. We can see that the x-intercept is  as we expected. 



336     4 • Linear Functions

Figure 22 

 TRY IT #8 Find the x-intercept of 

Describing Horizontal and Vertical Lines 
There are two special cases of lines on a graph—horizontal and vertical lines. A horizontal line indicates a constant 
output, or y-value. In Figure 23, we see that the output has a value of 2 for every input value. The change in outputs 
between any two points, therefore, is 0. In the slope formula, the numerator is 0, so the slope is 0. If we use  in the 
equation  the equation simplifies to  In other words, the value of the function is a constant. This 
graph represents the function 

Figure 23 A horizontal line representing the function 
A vertical line indicates a constant input, or x-value. We can see that the input value for every point on the line is 2, but 
the output value varies. Because this input value is mapped to more than one output value, a vertical line does not 
represent a function. Notice that between any two points, the change in the input values is zero. In the slope formula, 
the denominator will be zero, so the slope of a vertical line is undefined. 

Access for free at openstax.org



4.1 • Linear Functions     337

Figure 24 Example of how a line has a vertical slope. 0 in the denominator of the slope. 
A vertical line, such as the one in Figure 25, has an x-intercept, but no y-intercept unless it’s the line  This graph 
represents the line 

Figure 25 The vertical line,  which does not represent a function 

Horizontal and Vertical Lines 

Lines can be horizontal or vertical. 

A horizontal line is a line defined by an equation in the form 

A vertical line is a line defined by an equation in the form 

EXAMPLE 16 

Writing the Equation of a Horizontal Line 
Write the equation of the line graphed in Figure 26. 



338     4 • Linear Functions

Figure 26 

Solution 
For any x-value, the y-value is  so the equation is 

EXAMPLE 17 

Writing the Equation of a Vertical Line 
Write the equation of the line graphed in Figure 27. 

Figure 27 

Solution 
The constant x-value is  so the equation is 

Determining Whether Lines are Parallel or Perpendicular 
The two lines in Figure 28 are parallel lines: they will never intersect. They have exactly the same steepness, which means 
their slopes are identical. The only difference between the two lines is the y-intercept. If we shifted one line vertically 
toward the other, they would become coincident. 

Access for free at openstax.org



4.1 • Linear Functions     339

Figure 28 Parallel lines 
We can determine from their equations whether two lines are parallel by comparing their slopes. If the slopes are the 
same and the y-intercepts are different, the lines are parallel. If the slopes are different, the lines are not parallel. 

Unlike parallel lines, perpendicular lines do intersect. Their intersection forms a right, or 90-degree, angle. The two lines 
in Figure 29 are perpendicular. 

Figure 29 Perpendicular lines 
Perpendicular lines do not have the same slope. The slopes of perpendicular lines are different from one another in a 
specific way. The slope of one line is the negative reciprocal of the slope of the other line. The product of a number and 
its reciprocal is  So, if  are negative reciprocals of one another, they can be multiplied together to yield 

To find the reciprocal of a number, divide 1 by the number. So the reciprocal of 8 is  and the reciprocal of  is 8. To find 
the negative reciprocal, first find the reciprocal and then change the sign. 
As with parallel lines, we can determine whether two lines are perpendicular by comparing their slopes, assuming that 
the lines are neither horizontal nor vertical. The slope of each line below is the negative reciprocal of the other so the 
lines are perpendicular. 



340     4 • Linear Functions

The product of the slopes is –1. 

Parallel and Perpendicular Lines 

Two lines are parallel lines if they do not intersect. The slopes of the lines are the same. 

If and only if  and  we say the lines coincide. Coincident lines are the same line. 

Two lines are perpendicular lines if they intersect to form a right angle. 

EXAMPLE 18 

Identifying Parallel and Perpendicular Lines 
Given the functions below, identify the functions whose graphs are a pair of parallel lines and a pair of perpendicular 
lines. 

Solution 
Parallel lines have the same slope. Because the functions  and  each have a slope of 2, they 
represent parallel lines. Perpendicular lines have negative reciprocal slopes. Because −2 and  are negative reciprocals, 
the functions  and  represent perpendicular lines. 

Analysis 
A graph of the lines is shown in Figure 30. 

Figure 30 

The graph shows that the lines  and  are parallel, and the lines  and 
 are perpendicular. 

Writing the Equation of a Line Parallel or Perpendicular to a Given Line 
If we know the equation of a line, we can use what we know about slope to write the equation of a line that is either 

Access for free at openstax.org



4.1 • Linear Functions     341

parallel or perpendicular to the given line. 

Writing Equations of Parallel Lines 
Suppose for example, we are given the equation shown. 

We know that the slope of the line formed by the function is 3. We also know that the y-intercept is  Any other line 
with a slope of 3 will be parallel to  So the lines formed by all of the following functions will be parallel to 

Suppose then we want to write the equation of a line that is parallel to  and passes through the point  This type of 
problem is often described as a point-slope problem because we have a point and a slope. In our example, we know that 
the slope is 3. We need to determine which value of  will give the correct line. We can begin with the point-slope form of 
an equation for a line, and then rewrite it in the slope-intercept form. 

So  is parallel to  and passes through the point 
...

HOW TO 

Given the equation of a function and a point through which its graph passes, write the equation of a line 
parallel to the given line that passes through the given point. 

1. Find the slope of the function. 
2. Substitute the given values into either the general point-slope equation or the slope-intercept equation for a line. 
3. Simplify. 

EXAMPLE 19 

Finding a Line Parallel to a Given Line 
Find a line parallel to the graph of  that passes through the point 

Solution 
The slope of the given line is 3. If we choose the slope-intercept form, we can substitute  and  into 
the slope-intercept form to find the y-intercept. 

The line parallel to  that passes through  is 

Analysis 
We can confirm that the two lines are parallel by graphing them. Figure 31 shows that the two lines will never intersect. 



342     4 • Linear Functions

Figure 31 

Writing Equations of Perpendicular Lines 
We can use a very similar process to write the equation for a line perpendicular to a given line. Instead of using the same 
slope, however, we use the negative reciprocal of the given slope. Suppose we are given the function shown. 

The slope of the line is 2, and its negative reciprocal is  Any function with a slope of  will be perpendicular to 
So the lines formed by all of the following functions will be perpendicular to 

As before, we can narrow down our choices for a particular perpendicular line if we know that it passes through a given 
point. Suppose then we want to write the equation of a line that is perpendicular to  and passes through the point 

 We already know that the slope is  Now we can use the point to find the y-intercept by substituting the given 
values into the slope-intercept form of a line and solving for 

The equation for the function with a slope of  and a y-intercept of 2 is 

So  is perpendicular to  and passes through the point  Be aware that perpendicular 
lines may not look obviously perpendicular on a graphing calculator unless we use the square zoom feature. 

 Q&A A horizontal line has a slope of zero and a vertical line has an undefined slope. These two lines 
are perpendicular, but the product of their slopes is not –1. Doesn’t this fact contradict the 
definition of perpendicular lines? 

No. For two perpendicular linear functions, the product of their slopes is –1. However, a vertical line is 
not a function so the definition is not contradicted. 

...
HOW TO 

Given the equation of a function and a point through which its graph passes, write the equation of a line 

Access for free at openstax.org



4.1 • Linear Functions     343

perpendicular to the given line. 

1. Find the slope of the function. 
2. Determine the negative reciprocal of the slope. 
3. Substitute the new slope and the values for  and  from the coordinate pair provided into 
4. Solve for 
5. Write the equation of the line. 

EXAMPLE 20 

Finding the Equation of a Perpendicular Line 
Find the equation of a line perpendicular to  that passes through the point 

Solution 
The original line has slope  so the slope of the perpendicular line will be its negative reciprocal, or  Using this 
slope and the given point, we can find the equation of the line. 

The line perpendicular to  that passes through  is 

Analysis 
A graph of the two lines is shown in Figure 32. 

Figure 32 
Note that that if we graph perpendicular lines on a graphing calculator using standard zoom, the lines may not appear 
to be perpendicular. Adjusting the window will make it possible to zoom in further to see the intersection more closely. 

 TRY IT #9 Given the function  write an equation for the line passing through  that is 

ⓐ parallel to  ⓑ perpendicular to 

...
HOW TO 

Given two points on a line and a third point, write the equation of the perpendicular line that passes through 
the point. 

1. Determine the slope of the line passing through the points. 
2. Find the negative reciprocal of the slope. 



344     4 • Linear Functions

3. Use the slope-intercept form or point-slope form to write the equation by substituting the known values. 
4. Simplify. 

EXAMPLE 21 

Finding the Equation of a Line Perpendicular to a Given Line Passing through a Point 
A line passes through the points  and  Find the equation of a perpendicular line that passes through the 
point 

Solution 
From the two points of the given line, we can calculate the slope of that line. 

Find the negative reciprocal of the slope. 

We can then solve for the y-intercept of the line passing through the point 

The equation for the line that is perpendicular to the line passing through the two given points and also passes through 
point  is 

 TRY IT #10 A line passes through the points,  and  Find the equation of a perpendicular line 
that passes through the point, 

 MEDIA 

Access this online resource for additional instruction and practice with linear functions. 

Linear Functions (https://openstax.org/l/linearfunctions) 
Finding Input of Function from the Output and Graph (https://openstax.org/l/findinginput) 
Graphing Functions using Tables (https://openstax.org/l/graphwithtable) 

Access for free at openstax.org



4.1 • Linear Functions     345

 4.1 SECTION EXERCISES 
Verbal 

1 . Terry is skiing down a steep  2 . Jessica is walking home  3 . A boat is 100 miles away 
hill. Terry's elevation, from a friend’s house. After from the marina, sailing 
in feet after  seconds is 2 minutes she is 1.4 miles directly toward it at 10 miles 
given by from home. Twelve minutes per hour. Write an equation 
Write a complete sentence after leaving, she is 0.9 for the distance of the boat 
describing Terry’s starting miles from home. What is from the marina after t 
elevation and how it is her rate in miles per hour? hours. 
changing over time. 

4 . If the graphs of two linear  5 . If a horizontal line has the 
functions are perpendicular, equation  and a 
describe the relationship vertical line has the 
between the slopes and the equation  what is the 
y-intercepts. point of intersection? 

Explain why what you found 
is the point of intersection. 

Algebraic 

For the following exercises, determine whether the equation of the curve can be written as a linear function. 

6 .  7 .  8 . 

9 .  10 .  11 . 

12 .  13 . 

For the following exercises, determine whether each function is increasing or decreasing. 
14 .  15 .  16 . 
17 .  18 .  19 . 

20 .  21 .  22 . 

23 . 

For the following exercises, find the slope of the line that passes through the two given points. 
24 .  and  25 .  and  26 .  and 
27 .  and  28 .  and 

For the following exercises, given each set of information, find a linear equation satisfying the conditions, if possible. 
29 .  and  30 .  and  31 . Passes through  and 

32 . Passes through  and 33 . Passes through  and 34 . Passes through  and 

35 . x intercept at  and y 36 . x intercept at  and y 
intercept at intercept at 



346     4 • Linear Functions

For the following exercises, determine whether the lines given by the equations below are parallel, perpendicular, or 
neither. 

37 .  38 .  39 . 

40 . 

For the following exercises, find the x- and y-intercepts of each equation. 
41 . 42 .  43 . 
44 .  45 .  46 . 

For the following exercises, use the descriptions of each pair of lines given below to find the slopes of Line 1 and Line 2. 
Is each pair of lines parallel, perpendicular, or neither? 
47 . Line 1: Passes through  48 . Line 1: Passes through  49 . Line 1: Passes through 

 and  and  and 
Line 2: Passes through Line 2: Passes through Line 2: Passes through 

 and  and  and 
50 . Line 1: Passes through  51 . Line 1: Passes through 

 and  and 
Line 2: Passes through Line 2: Passes through 

 and  and 

For the following exercises, write an equation for the line described. 
52 . Write an equation for a line  53 . Write an equation for a line  54 . Write an equation for a line 

parallel to parallel to perpendicular to 
and passing through the and passing through the  and passing 
point point through the point 

55 . Write an equation for a line 
perpendicular to 

 and passing 
through the point 

Graphical 

For the following exercises, find the slope of the line graphed. 
56 .  57 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



4.1 • Linear Functions     347

For the following exercises, write an equation for the line graphed. 
58 .  59 .  60 . 

61 .  62 .  63 . 

For the following exercises, match the given linear equation with its graph in Figure 33. 

Figure 33 

64 .  65 .  66 . 

67 .  68 .  69 . 



348     4 • Linear Functions

For the following exercises, sketch a line with the given features. 
70 . An x-intercept of  71 . An x-intercept  and 72 . A y-intercept of  and 

and y-intercept of y-intercept of slope 

73 . A y-intercept of  and 74 . Passing through the points  75 . Passing through the points 
slope  and  and 

For the following exercises, sketch the graph of each equation. 

76 .  77 . 78 . 

79 . 80 .  81 . 

82 .  83 . 84 . 

For the following exercises, write the equation of the line shown in the graph. 
85 . 86 . 87 . 

88 . 

Numeric 

For the following exercises, which of the tables could represent a linear function? For each that could be linear, find a 
linear equation that models the data. 
89 .  90 . 91 . 

0 5 10 15 0 5 10 15 0 5 10 15 

5 –10 –25 –40 5 30 105 230 –5 20 45 70 

Access for free at openstax.org



4.1 • Linear Functions     349

92 .  93.  94 . 
5 10 20 25 0 2 4 6 2 4 8 10 

13 28 58 73 6 –19 –44 –69 13 23 43 53 

95 .  96 . 
2 4 6 8 0 2 6 8 

–4 16 36 56 6 31 106 231 

Technology 

For the following exercises, use a calculator or graphing technology to complete the task. 
97 . If  is a linear function,  98 . Graph the function  on a  99 . Graph the function  on a 

 , and domain of domain of 
 , find an 

equation for the function. Enter the function in a graphing 
utility. For the viewing window, 
set the minimum value of  to 
be  and the maximum 
value of  to be  . 

100. Table 3 shows the input,  and 101 . Table 4 shows the input,  and 102 . Graph the linear function 
output,  for a linear function output,  for a linear function  on a domain of 

ⓐ Fill in the missing values of the  for the function 
ⓐ Fill in the missing values of table. whose slope is  and 
the table. ⓑ Write the linear function y-intercept is  Label 
ⓑ Write the linear function the points for the input 
round to 3 decimal places. p 0.5 0.8 12 b values of  and 

w –10 5.5 67.5 b q 400 700 a 1,000,000 

k 30 –26 a –44 Table 4 

Table 3 

103. Graph the linear function 104 . Graph the linear function 
 on a domain of  where 

 for the on the same set of axes 
function whose slope is on a domain of  for 
75 and y-intercept is the following values of 

 Label the points and 
for the input values of ⓐ  

 and ⓑ  
ⓒ  
ⓓ  



350     4 • Linear Functions

Extensions 

105. Find the value of  if a 106 . Find the value of y if a 107 . Find the equation of the 
linear function goes linear function goes line that passes through 
through the following through the following the following points: 
points and has the points and has the  and 
following slope: following slope: 

108. Find the equation of the 109 . Find the equation of the 110 . Find the equation of the 
line that passes through line that passes through line parallel to the line 
the following points: the following points: 

 and  and through the point 
111. Find the equation of the 

line perpendicular to the 
line 
through the point 

For the following exercises, use the functions 
112. Find the point of 113 . Where is  greater 

intersection of the lines than  Where is 
and greater than 

Real-World Applications 

114. At noon, a barista notices 115 . A gym membership with 116 . A clothing business finds 
that they have $20 in their two personal training there is a linear 
tip jar. If the barista sessions costs $125, while relationship between the 
makes an average of gym membership with number of shirts,  it can 
$0.50 from each five personal training sell and the price,  it can 
customer, how much will sessions costs $260. What charge per shirt. In 
they have in the tip jar if is cost per session? particular, historical data 
they serve  more shows that 1,000 shirts 
customers during the can be sold at a price of 
shift?  while 3,000 shirts 

can be sold at a price of 
$22. Find a linear 
equation in the form 

 that gives 
the price  they can 
charge for  shirts. 

117. A phone company 118 . A farmer finds there is a 119 . A city’s population in the 
charges for service linear relationship year 1960 was 287,500. In 
according to the formula: between the number of 1989 the population was 

 where bean stalks,  she plants 275,900. Compute the 
 is the number of and the yield,  each rate of growth of the 

minutes talked, and plant produces. When she population and make a 
is the monthly charge, in plants 30 stalks, each statement about the 
dollars. Find and interpret plant yields 30 oz of population rate of change 
the rate of change and beans. When she plants in people per year. 
initial value. 34 stalks, each plant 

produces 28 oz of beans. 
Find a linear relationships 
in the form 
that gives the yield when 

 stalks are planted. 

Access for free at openstax.org



4.2 • Modeling with Linear Functions     351

120. A town’s population has 121 . Suppose that average 122 . When temperature is 0 
been growing linearly. In annual income (in dollars) degrees Celsius, the 
2003, the population was for the years 1990 Fahrenheit temperature is 
45,000, and the through 1999 is given by 32. When the Celsius 
population has been the linear function: temperature is 100, the 
growing by 1,700 people , corresponding Fahrenheit 
each year. Write an where  is the number of temperature is 212. 
equation,  for the years after 1990. Which of Express the Fahrenheit 
population  years after the following interprets temperature as a linear 
2003. the slope in the context of function of  the Celsius 

the problem? temperature, 
ⓐ As of 1990, average ⓐ Find the rate of 
annual income was change of Fahrenheit 
$23,286. temperature for each unit 
ⓑ In the ten-year period change temperature of 
from 1990–1999, average Celsius. 
annual income increased ⓑ Find and interpret 
by a total of $1,054. 
ⓒ Each year in the ⓒ Find and interpret 
decade of the 1990s, 
average annual income 
increased by $1,054. 
ⓓ Average annual 
income rose to a level of 
$23,286 by the end of 
1999. 

4.2 Modeling with Linear Functions 
Learning Objectives 
In this section, you will: 

Build linear models from verbal descriptions. 
Model a set of data with a linear function. 

Figure 1 (credit: EEK Photography/Flickr) 
Elan is a college student who plans to spend a summer in Seattle. Elan has saved $3,500 for their trip and anticipates 
spending $400 each week on rent, food, and activities. How can we write a linear model to represent this situation? What 
would be the x-intercept, and what can Elan learn from it? To answer these and related questions, we can create a model 
using a linear function. Models such as this one can be extremely useful for analyzing relationships and making 
predictions based on those relationships. In this section, we will explore examples of linear function models. 



352     4 • Linear Functions

Building Linear Models from Verbal Descriptions 
When building linear models to solve problems involving quantities with a constant rate of change, we typically follow 
the same problem strategies that we would use for any type of function. Let’s briefly review them: 
1. Identify changing quantities, and then define descriptive variables to represent those quantities. When appropriate, 

sketch a picture or define a coordinate system. 
2. Carefully read the problem to identify important information. Look for information that provides values for the 

variables or values for parts of the functional model, such as slope and initial value. 
3. Carefully read the problem to determine what we are trying to find, identify, solve, or interpret. 
4. Identify a solution pathway from the provided information to what we are trying to find. Often this will involve 

checking and tracking units, building a table, or even finding a formula for the function being used to model the 
problem. 

5. When needed, write a formula for the function. 
6. Solve or evaluate the function using the formula. 
7. Reflect on whether your answer is reasonable for the given situation and whether it makes sense mathematically. 
8. Clearly convey your result using appropriate units, and answer in full sentences when necessary. 

Now let’s take a look at the student in Seattle. In Elan’s situation, there are two changing quantities: time and money. The 
amount of money they have remaining while on vacation depends on how long they stay. We can use this information to 
define our variables, including units. 

So, the amount of money remaining depends on the number of weeks:  . 

Notice that the unit of dollars per week matches the unit of our output variable divided by our input variable. Also, 
because the slope is negative, the linear function is decreasing. This should make sense because she is spending money 
each week. 
The rate of change is constant, so we can start with the linear model  Then we can substitute the 
intercept and slope provided. 

To find the t-intercept (horizontal axis intercept), we set the output to zero, and solve for the input. 

The t-intercept (horizontal axis intercept) is 8.75 weeks. Because this represents the input value when the output will be 
zero, we could say that Elan will have no money left after 8.75 weeks. 
When modeling any real-life scenario with functions, there is typically a limited domain over which that model will be 
valid—almost no trend continues indefinitely. Here the domain refers to the number of weeks. In this case, it doesn’t 
make sense to talk about input values less than zero. A negative input value could refer to a number of weeks before 
Elan saved $3,500, but the scenario discussed poses the question once they saved $3,500 because this is when the trip 
and subsequent spending starts. It is also likely that this model is not valid after the t-intercept (horizontal axis 
intercept), unless Elan uses a credit card and goes into debt. The domain represents the set of input values, so the 
reasonable domain for this function is 
In this example, we were given a written description of the situation. We followed the steps of modeling a problem to 
analyze the information. However, the information provided may not always be the same. Sometimes we might be 
provided with an intercept. Other times we might be provided with an output value. We must be careful to analyze the 

Access for free at openstax.org



4.2 • Modeling with Linear Functions     353

information we are given, and use it appropriately to build a linear model. 

Using a Given Intercept to Build a Model 
Some real-world problems provide the vertical axis intercept, which is the constant or initial value. Once the vertical axis 
intercept is known, the t-intercept (horizontal axis intercept) can be calculated. Suppose, for example, that Hannah plans 
to pay off a no-interest loan from her parents. Her loan balance is $1,000. She plans to pay $250 per month until her 
balance is $0. The y-intercept is the initial amount of her debt, or $1,000. The rate of change, or slope, is -$250 per 
month. We can then use the slope-intercept form and the given information to develop a linear model. 

Now we can set the function equal to 0, and solve for  to find the x-intercept. 

The x-intercept is the number of months it takes her to reach a balance of $0. The x-intercept is 4 months, so it will take 
Hannah four months to pay off her loan. 

Using a Given Input and Output to Build a Model 
Many real-world applications are not as direct as the ones we just considered. Instead they require us to identify some 
aspect of a linear function. We might sometimes instead be asked to evaluate the linear model at a given input or set the 
equation of the linear model equal to a specified output. 

...
HOW TO 

Given a word problem that includes two pairs of input and output values, use the linear function to solve a 
problem. 

1. Identify the input and output values. 
2. Convert the data to two coordinate pairs. 
3. Find the slope. 
4. Write the linear model. 
5. Use the model to make a prediction by evaluating the function at a given x-value. 
6. Use the model to identify an x-value that results in a given y-value. 
7. Answer the question posed. 

EXAMPLE 1 

Using a Linear Model to Investigate a Town’s Population 
A town’s population has been growing linearly. In 2004, the population was 6,200. By 2009, the population had grown to 
8,100. Assume this trend continues. 

ⓐ Predict the population in 2013.  ⓑ Identify the year in which the population will reach 15,000. 
Solution 

The two changing quantities are the population size and time. While we could use the actual year value as the input 
quantity, doing so tends to lead to very cumbersome equations because the y-intercept would correspond to the year 0, 
more than 2000 years ago! 
To make computation a little nicer, we will define our input as the number of years since 2004. 

To predict the population in 2013 (  ), we would first need an equation for the population. Likewise, to find when the 



354     4 • Linear Functions

population would reach 15,000, we would need to solve for the input that would provide an output of 15,000. To write an 
equation, we need the initial value and the rate of change, or slope. 
To determine the rate of change, we will use the change in output per change in input. 

The problem gives us two input-output pairs. Converting them to match our defined variables, the year 2004 would 
correspond to  giving the point  Notice that through our clever choice of variable definition, we have 
“given” ourselves the y-intercept of the function. The year 2009 would correspond to  giving the point 
The two coordinate pairs are  and  Recall that we encountered examples in which we were provided 
two points earlier in the chapter. We can use these values to calculate the slope. 

We already know the y-intercept of the line, so we can immediately write the equation: 

To predict the population in 2013, we evaluate our function at 

If the trend continues, our model predicts a population of 9,620 in 2013. 
To find when the population will reach 15,000, we can set  and solve for 

Our model predicts the population will reach 15,000 in a little more than 23 years after 2004, or somewhere around the 
year 2027. 

 TRY IT #1 A company sells doughnuts. They incur a fixed cost of $25,000 for rent, insurance, and other 
expenses. It costs $0.25 to produce each doughnut. 

ⓐ  Write a linear model to represent the cost  of the company as a function of  the number of 
doughnuts produced. 
ⓑ  Find and interpret the y-intercept. 

 TRY IT #2 A city’s population has been growing linearly. In 2008, the population was 28,200. By 2012, the 
population was 36,800. Assume this trend continues. 

ⓐ Predict the population in 2014. 
ⓑ Identify the year in which the population will reach 54,000. 

Using a Diagram to Build a Model 
It is useful for many real-world applications to draw a picture to gain a sense of how the variables representing the input 
and output may be used to answer a question. To draw the picture, first consider what the problem is asking for. Then, 
determine the input and the output. The diagram should relate the variables. Often, geometrical shapes or figures are 
drawn. Distances are often traced out. If a right triangle is sketched, the Pythagorean Theorem relates the sides. If a 
rectangle is sketched, labeling width and height is helpful. 

Access for free at openstax.org



4.2 • Modeling with Linear Functions     355

EXAMPLE 2 

Using a Diagram to Model Distance Walked 
Anna and Emanuel start at the same intersection. Anna walks east at 4 miles per hour while Emanuel walks south at 3 
miles per hour. They are communicating with a two-way radio that has a range of 2 miles. How long after they start 
walking will they fall out of radio contact? 

Solution 
In essence, we can partially answer this question by saying they will fall out of radio contact when they are 2 miles apart, 
which leads us to ask a new question: 
"How long will it take them to be 2 miles apart"? 
In this problem, our changing quantities are time and position, but ultimately we need to know how long will it take for 
them to be 2 miles apart. We can see that time will be our input variable, so we’ll define our input and output variables. 

Because it is not obvious how to define our output variable, we’ll start by drawing a picture such as Figure 2. 

Figure 2 
Initial Value: They both start at the same intersection so when  the distance traveled by each person should also be 
0. Thus the initial value for each is 0. 
Rate of Change: Anna is walking 4 miles per hour and Emanuel is walking 3 miles per hour, which are both rates of 
change. The slope for  is 4 and the slope for  is 3. 
Using those values, we can write formulas for the distance each person has walked. 

For this problem, the distances from the starting point are important. To notate these, we can define a coordinate 
system, identifying the “starting point” at the intersection where they both started. Then we can use the variable, 
which we introduced above, to represent Anna’s position, and define it to be a measurement from the starting point in 
the eastward direction. Likewise, can use the variable,  to represent Emanuel’s position, measured from the starting 
point in the southward direction. Note that in defining the coordinate system, we specified both the starting point of the 
measurement and the direction of measure. 
We can then define a third variable,  to be the measurement of the distance between Anna and Emanuel. Showing the 
variables on the diagram is often helpful, as we can see from Figure 3. 
Recall that we need to know how long it takes for  the distance between them, to equal 2 miles. Notice that for any 
given input  the outputs  and  represent distances. 



356     4 • Linear Functions

Figure 3 
Figure 2 shows us that we can use the Pythagorean Theorem because we have drawn a right angle. 
Using the Pythagorean Theorem, we get: 

In this scenario we are considering only positive values of  so our distance  will always be positive. We can simplify 
this answer to  This means that the distance between Anna and Emanuel is also a linear function. Because  is 
a linear function, we can now answer the question of when the distance between them will reach 2 miles. We will set the 
output  and solve for 

They will fall out of radio contact in 0.4 hour, or 24 minutes. 

 Q&A Should I draw diagrams when given information based on a geometric shape? 

Yes. Sketch the figure and label the quantities and unknowns on the sketch. 

EXAMPLE 3 

Using a Diagram to Model Distance Between Cities 
There is a straight road leading from the town of Westborough to Agritown 30 miles east and 10 miles north. Partway 
down this road, it junctions with a second road, perpendicular to the first, leading to the town of Eastborough. If the 
town of Eastborough is located 20 miles directly east of the town of Westborough, how far is the road junction from 
Westborough? 

Solution 
It might help here to draw a picture of the situation. See Figure 4. It would then be helpful to introduce a coordinate 
system. While we could place the origin anywhere, placing it at Westborough seems convenient. This puts Agritown at 
coordinates  and Eastborough at 

Access for free at openstax.org



4.2 • Modeling with Linear Functions     357

Figure 4 
Using this point along with the origin, we can find the slope of the line from Westborough to Agritown. 

Now we can write an equation to describe the road from Westborough to Agritown. 

From this, we can determine the perpendicular road to Eastborough will have slope  Because the town of 
Eastborough is at the point (20, 0), we can find the equation. 

We can now find the coordinates of the junction of the roads by finding the intersection of these lines. Setting them 
equal, 

The roads intersect at the point (18, 6). Using the distance formula, we can now find the distance from Westborough to 
the junction. 

Analysis 
One nice use of linear models is to take advantage of the fact that the graphs of these functions are lines. This means 
real-world applications discussing maps need linear functions to model the distances between reference points. 

 TRY IT #3 There is a straight road leading from the town of Timpson to Ashburn 60 miles east and 12 miles 
north. Partway down the road, it junctions with a second road, perpendicular to the first, leading 
to the town of Garrison. If the town of Garrison is located 22 miles directly east of the town of 
Timpson, how far is the road junction from Timpson? 

Modeling a Set of Data with Linear Functions 
Real-world situations including two or more linear functions may be modeled with a system of linear equations. 
Remember, when solving a system of linear equations, we are looking for points the two lines have in common. Typically, 
there are three types of answers possible, as shown in Figure 5. 



358     4 • Linear Functions

Figure 5 
...

HOW TO 

Given a situation that represents a system of linear equations, write the system of equations and identify the 
solution. 

1. Identify the input and output of each linear model. 
2. Identify the slope and y-intercept of each linear model. 
3. Find the solution by setting the two linear functions equal to another and solving for  or find the point of 

intersection on a graph. 

EXAMPLE 4 

Building a System of Linear Models to Choose a Truck Rental Company 
Jamal is choosing between two truck-rental companies. The first, Keep on Trucking, Inc., charges an up-front fee of $20, 
then 59 cents a mile. The second, Move It Your Way, charges an up-front fee of $16, then 63 cents a mile4 . When will 
Keep on Trucking, Inc. be the better choice for Jamal? 

Solution 
The two important quantities in this problem are the cost and the number of miles driven. Because we have two 
companies to consider, we will define two functions in Table 1. 

Input  distance driven in miles 

Outputs  cost, in dollars, for renting from Keep on Trucking 
 cost, in dollars, for renting from Move It Your Way 

Initial Value Up-front fee:  and 

Rate of Change  /mile and  /mile 

Table 1 

A linear function is of the form  Using the rates of change and initial charges, we can write the equations 

Using these equations, we can determine when Keep on Trucking, Inc., will be the better choice. Because all we have to 
make that decision from is the costs, we are looking for when Move It Your Way, will cost less, or when 
The solution pathway will lead us to find the equations for the two functions, find the intersection, and then see where 
the  function is smaller. 

4 Rates retrieved Aug 2, 2010 from http://www.budgettruck.com and http://www.uhaul.com/ 

Access for free at openstax.org



4.2 • Modeling with Linear Functions     359

These graphs are sketched in Figure 6, with  in blue. 

Figure 6 
To find the intersection, we set the equations equal and solve: 

This tells us that the cost from the two companies will be the same if 100 miles are driven. Either by looking at the graph, 
or noting that  is growing at a slower rate, we can conclude that Keep on Trucking, Inc. will be the cheaper price 
when more than 100 miles are driven, that is  . 

 MEDIA 

Access this online resource for additional instruction and practice with linear function models. 

Interpreting a Linear Function (https://openstax.org/l/interpretlinear) 

 4.2 SECTION EXERCISES 
Verbal 

1 . Explain how to find the  2 . Explain how to find the  3 . Explain how to interpret the 
input variable in a word output variable in a word initial value in a word 
problem that uses a linear problem that uses a linear problem that uses a linear 
function. function. function. 

4 . Explain how to determine 
the slope in a word problem 
that uses a linear function. 

Algebraic 

5 . Find the area of a  6 . Find the area of a triangle  7 . Find the area of a triangle 
parallelogram bounded by bounded by the x-axis, the bounded by the y-axis, the 
the y-axis, the line line  and the line  and the 
the line  and line perpendicular to line perpendicular to 
the line parallel to that passes through the that passes through the 
passing through origin. origin. 

8 . Find the area of a parallelogram bounded by the 
x-axis, the line  the line  and the 
line parallel to  passing through 



360     4 • Linear Functions

For the following exercises, consider this scenario: A town’s population has been decreasing at a constant rate. In 2010 
the population was 5,900. By 2012 the population had dropped to 4,700. Assume this trend continues. 
9 . Predict the population in  10 . Identify the year in which 

2016. the population will reach 0. 

For the following exercises, consider this scenario: A town’s population has been increased at a constant rate. In 2010 the 
population was 46,020. By 2012 the population had increased to 52,070. Assume this trend continues. 
11 . Predict the population in  12 . Identify the year in which 

2016. the population will reach 
75,000. 

For the following exercises, consider this scenario: A town has an initial population of 75,000. It grows at a constant rate 
of 2,500 per year for 5 years. 
13 . Find the linear function  14 . Find a reasonable domain  15 . If the function  is 

that models the town’s and range for the function graphed, find and interpret 
population  as a function the x- and y-intercepts. 
of the year,  where  is the 
number of years since the 
model began. 

16 . If the function  is  17 . When will the population  18 . What is the population in 
graphed, find and interpret reach 100,000? the year 12 years from the 
the slope of the function. onset of the model? 

For the following exercises, consider this scenario: The weight of a newborn is 7.5 pounds. The baby gained one-half 
pound a month for its first year. 
19 . Find the linear function  20 . Find a reasonable domain  21 . If the function  is 

that models the baby’s and range for the function graphed, find and interpret 
weight  as a function of the x- and y-intercepts. 
the age of the baby, in 
months, 

22 . If the function W is  23 . When did the baby weigh  24 . What is the output when 
graphed, find and interpret 10.4 pounds? the input is 6.2? 
the slope of the function. 

For the following exercises, consider this scenario: The number of people afflicted with the common cold in the winter 
months steadily decreased by 205 each year from 2005 until 2010. In 2005, 12,025 people were inflicted. 
25 . Find the linear function  26 . Find a reasonable domain  27 . If the function  is 

that models the number of and range for the function graphed, find and interpret 
people inflicted with the the x- and y-intercepts. 
common cold  as a 
function of the year, 

28 . If the function  is  29 . When will the number of  30 . In what year will the 
graphed, find and interpret people afflicted with the number of people afflicted 
the slope of the function. common cold reach 0? with the common cold be 

9,700? 

Access for free at openstax.org



4.2 • Modeling with Linear Functions     361

Graphical 

For the following exercises, use the graph in Figure 7, which shows the profit,  in thousands of dollars, of a company in 
a given year,  where  represents the number of years since 1980. 

Figure 7 
31 . Find the linear function  32 . Find and interpret the  33 . Find and interpret the 

where  depends on  the y-intercept. x-intercept. 
number of years since 
1980. 

34 . Find and interpret the 
slope. 

For the following exercises, use the graph in Figure 8, which shows the profit,  in thousands of dollars, of a company in 
a given year,  where  represents the number of years since 1980. 

Figure 8 
35 . Find the linear function  36 . Find and interpret the 37 . Find and interpret the 

where  depends on  the y-intercept. x-intercept. 
number of years since 
1980. 

38 . Find and interpret the 
slope. 



362     4 • Linear Functions

Numeric 

For the following exercises, use the median home values in Mississippi and Hawaii (adjusted for inflation) shown in Table 
2. Assume that the house values are changing linearly. 

Year Mississippi Hawaii 

1950 $25,200 $74,400 

2000 $71,400 $272,700 

Table 2 

39 . In which state have home 40 . If these trends were to 41 . If we assume the linear 
values increased at a continue, what would be trend existed before 1950 
higher rate? the median home value in and continues after 2000, 

Mississippi in 2010? the two states’ median 
house values will be (or 
were) equal in what year? 
(The answer might be 
absurd.) 

For the following exercises, use the median home values in Indiana and Alabama (adjusted for inflation) shown in Table 
3. Assume that the house values are changing linearly. 

Year Indiana Alabama 

1950 $37,700 $27,100 

2000 $94,300 $85,100 

Table 3 

42 . In which state have home 43 . If these trends were to 44 . If we assume the linear 
values increased at a continue, what would be trend existed before 1950 
higher rate? the median home value in and continues after 2000, 

Indiana in 2010? the two states’ median 
house values will be (or 
were) equal in what year? 
(The answer might be 
absurd.) 

Access for free at openstax.org



4.2 • Modeling with Linear Functions     363

Real-World Applications 

45 . In 2004, a school 46 . In 2003, a town’s 47 . A phone company has a 
population was 1001. By population was 1431. By monthly cellular plan 
2008 the population had 2007 the population had where a customer pays a 
grown to 1697. Assume the grown to 2134. Assume the flat monthly fee and then a 
population is changing population is changing certain amount of money 
linearly. linearly. per minute used for voice 
ⓐ How much did the ⓐ How much did the or video calling. If a 
population grow between population grow between customer uses 410 
the year 2004 and 2008? the year 2003 and 2007? minutes, the monthly cost 
ⓑ How long did it take the ⓑ How long did it take the will be $71.50. If the 
population to grow from population to grow from customer uses 720 
1001 students to 1697 1431 people to 2134 minutes, the monthly cost 
students? people? will be $118. 

ⓒ What is the average ⓒ What is the average ⓐ Find a linear equation 
population growth per population growth per for the monthly cost of the 
year? year? cell plan as a function of x, 

ⓓ What was the ⓓ What was the the number of monthly 
population in the year population in the year minutes used. 
2000? 2000? ⓑ Interpret the slope and 

ⓔ Find an equation for ⓔ Find an equation for y-intercept of the equation. 
the population,  of the the population,  of the ⓒ Use your equation to 
school t years after 2000. town  years after 2000. find the total monthly cost 

ⓕ Using your equation, ⓕ Using your equation, if 687 minutes are used. 
predict the population of predict the population of 
the school in 2011. the town in 2014. 

48 . A phone company has a 49 . In 1990, the moose 50 . In 2003, the owl population 
monthly cellular data plan population in a park was in a park was measured to 
where a customer pays a measured to be 4,360. By be 340. By 2007, the 
flat monthly fee of $10 and 1999, the population was population was measured 
then a certain amount of measured again to be again to be 285. The 
money per megabyte (MB) 5,880. Assume the population changes 
of data used on the phone. population continues to linearly. Let the input be 
If a customer uses 20 MB, change linearly. years since 2003. 
the monthly cost will be ⓐ Find a formula for the ⓐ Find a formula for the 
$11.20. If the customer moose population, P since owl population,  Let the 
uses 130 MB, the monthly 1991. input be years since 2003. 
cost will be $17.80. ⓑ What does your model ⓑ What does your model 
ⓐ Find a linear equation predict the moose predict the owl population 
for the monthly cost of the population to be in 2003? to be in 2012? 
data plan as a function of 

 the number of MB used. 
ⓑ Interpret the slope and 
y-intercept of the equation. 
ⓒ Use your equation to 
find the total monthly cost 
if 250 MB are used. 



364     4 • Linear Functions

51 . The Federal Helium 52 . Suppose the world’s oil 53 . You are choosing between 
Reserve held about 16 reserves in 2014 are 1,820 two different prepaid cell 
billion cubic feet of helium billion barrels. If, on phone plans. The first plan 
in 2010 and is being average, the total reserves charges a rate of 26 cents 
depleted by about 2.1 are decreasing by 25 billion per minute. The second 
billion cubic feet each year. barrels of oil each year: plan charges a monthly fee 
ⓐ  Give a linear equation ⓐ  Give a linear equation of $19.95 plus 11 cents per 
for the remaining federal for the remaining oil minute. How many 
helium reserves,  in reserves,  in terms of minutes would you have to 
terms of  the number of the number of years since use in a month in order for 
years since 2010. now. the second plan to be 
ⓑ  In 2015, what will the ⓑ  Seven years from now, preferable? 
helium reserves be? what will the oil reserves 
ⓒ  If the rate of depletion be? 
doesn’t change, in what ⓒ  If the rate at which the 
year will the Federal reserves are decreasing is 
Helium Reserve be constant, when will the 
depleted? world’s oil reserves be 

depleted? 
54 . You are choosing between 55 . When hired at a new job 56 . When hired at a new job 

two different window selling jewelry, you are selling electronics, you are 
washing companies. The given two pay options: given two pay options: 
first charges $5 per Option A: Base salary of Option A: Base salary of 
window. The second $17,000 a year with a $14,000 a year with a 
charges a base fee of $40 commission of 12% of your commission of 10% of your 
plus $3 per window. How sales sales 
many windows would you Option B: Base salary of Option B: Base salary of 
need to have for the $20,000 a year with a $19,000 a year with a 
second company to be commission of 5% of your commission of 4% of your 
preferable? sales sales 

How much jewelry would How much electronics 
you need to sell for option would you need to sell for 
A to produce a larger option A to produce a 
income? larger income? 

57 . When hired at a new job 58 . When hired at a new job 
selling electronics, you are selling electronics, you are 
given two pay options: given two pay options: 
Option A: Base salary of Option A: Base salary of 
$20,000 a year with a $10,000 a year with a 
commission of 12% of your commission of 9% of your 
sales sales 
Option B: Base salary of Option B: Base salary of 
$26,000 a year with a $20,000 a year with a 
commission of 3% of your commission of 4% of your 
sales sales 
How much electronics How much electronics 
would you need to sell for would you need to sell for 
option A to produce a option A to produce a 
larger income? larger income? 

Access for free at openstax.org



4.3 • Fitting Linear Models to Data     365

4.3 Fitting Linear Models to Data 
Learning Objectives 
In this section, you will: 

Draw and interpret scatter diagrams. 
Use a graphing utility to find the line of best fit. 
Distinguish between linear and nonlinear relations. 
Fit a regression line to a set of data and use the linear model to make predictions. 

A professor is attempting to identify trends among final exam scores. His class has a mixture of students, so he wonders 
if there is any relationship between age and final exam scores. One way for him to analyze the scores is by creating a 
diagram that relates the age of each student to the exam score received. In this section, we will examine one such 
diagram known as a scatter plot. 

Drawing and Interpreting Scatter Plots 
A scatter plot is a graph of plotted points that may show a relationship between two sets of data. If the relationship is 
from a linear model, or a model that is nearly linear, the professor can draw conclusions using his knowledge of linear 
functions. Figure 1 shows a sample scatter plot. 

Figure 1 A scatter plot of age and final exam score variables 
Notice this scatter plot does not indicate a linear relationship. The points do not appear to follow a trend. In other words, 
there does not appear to be a relationship between the age of the student and the score on the final exam. 

EXAMPLE 1 

Using a Scatter Plot to Investigate Cricket Chirps 
The table below shows the number of cricket chirps in 15 seconds, for several different air temperatures, in degrees 
Fahrenheit5 . Plot this data, and determine whether the data appears to be linearly related. 

Chirps 44 35 20.4 33 31 35 18.5 37 26 

Temperature 80.5 70.5 57 66 68 72 52 73.5 53 

Table 1 Cricket Chirps vs Air Temperature 

Solution 
Plotting this data, as depicted in Figure 2 suggests that there may be a trend. We can see from the trend in the data that 
the number of chirps increases as the temperature increases. The trend appears to be roughly linear, though certainly 
not perfectly so. 

5 Selected data from http://classic.globe.gov/fsl/scientistsblog/2007/10/. Retrieved Aug 3, 2010 



366     4 • Linear Functions

Figure 2 

Finding the Line of Best Fit 
Once we recognize a need for a linear function to model that data, the natural follow-up question is “what is that linear 
function?” One way to approximate our linear function is to sketch the line that seems to best fit the data. Then we can 
extend the line until we can verify the y-intercept. We can approximate the slope of the line by extending it until we can 
estimate the 

EXAMPLE 2 

Finding a Line of Best Fit 
Find a linear function that fits the data in Table 1 by “eyeballing” a line that seems to fit. 

Solution 
On a graph, we could try sketching a line. Using the starting and ending points of our hand drawn line, points (0, 30) and 
(50, 90), this graph has a slope of 

and a y-intercept at 30. This gives an equation of 

where  is the number of chirps in 15 seconds, and  is the temperature in degrees Fahrenheit. The resulting 
equation is represented in Figure 3. 

Access for free at openstax.org



4.3 • Fitting Linear Models to Data     367

Figure 3 

Analysis 
This linear equation can then be used to approximate answers to various questions we might ask about the trend. 

Recognizing Interpolation or Extrapolation 
While the data for most examples does not fall perfectly on the line, the equation is our best guess as to how the 
relationship will behave outside of the values for which we have data. We use a process known as interpolation when 
we predict a value inside the domain and range of the data. The process of extrapolation is used when we predict a 
value outside the domain and range of the data. 
Figure 4 compares the two processes for the cricket-chirp data addressed in Example 2. We can see that interpolation 
would occur if we used our model to predict temperature when the values for chirps are between 18.5 and 44. 
Extrapolation would occur if we used our model to predict temperature when the values for chirps are less than 18.5 or 
greater than 44. 
There is a difference between making predictions inside the domain and range of values for which we have data and 
outside that domain and range. Predicting a value outside of the domain and range has its limitations. When our model 
no longer applies after a certain point, it is sometimes called model breakdown. For example, predicting a cost function 
for a period of two years may involve examining the data where the input is the time in years and the output is the cost. 
But if we try to extrapolate a cost when  that is in 50 years, the model would not apply because we could not 
account for factors fifty years in the future. 



368     4 • Linear Functions

Figure 4 Interpolation occurs within the domain and range of the provided data whereas extrapolation occurs outside. 

Interpolation and Extrapolation 

Different methods of making predictions are used to analyze data. 

The method of interpolation involves predicting a value inside the domain and/or range of the data. 
The method of extrapolation involves predicting a value outside the domain and/or range of the data. 
Model breakdown occurs at the point when the model no longer applies. 

EXAMPLE 3 

Understanding Interpolation and Extrapolation 
Use the cricket data from Table 1 to answer the following questions: 

ⓐ Would predicting the temperature when crickets are chirping 30 times in 15 seconds be interpolation or 
extrapolation? Make the prediction, and discuss whether it is reasonable. 
ⓑ Would predicting the number of chirps crickets will make at 40 degrees be interpolation or extrapolation? Make 
the prediction, and discuss whether it is reasonable. 

Solution 
ⓐ The number of chirps in the data provided varied from 18.5 to 44. A prediction at 30 chirps per 15 seconds is 
inside the domain of our data, so would be interpolation. Using our model: 

Based on the data we have, this value seems reasonable. 

ⓑ The temperature values varied from 52 to 80.5. Predicting the number of chirps at 40 degrees is extrapolation 
because 40 is outside the range of our data. Using our model: 

We can compare the regions of interpolation and extrapolation using Figure 5. 

Access for free at openstax.org



4.3 • Fitting Linear Models to Data     369

Figure 5 

Analysis 
Our model predicts the crickets would chirp 8.33 times in 15 seconds. While this might be possible, we have no reason to 
believe our model is valid outside the domain and range. In fact, generally crickets stop chirping altogether below 
around 50 degrees. 

 TRY IT #1 According to the data from Table 1, what temperature can we predict it is if we counted 20 chirps 
in 15 seconds? 

Finding the Line of Best Fit Using a Graphing Utility 
While eyeballing a line works reasonably well, there are statistical techniques for fitting a line to data that minimize the 
differences between the line and data values6 . One such technique is called least squares regression and can be 
computed by many graphing calculators, spreadsheet software, statistical software, and many web-based calculators7 . 
Least squares regression is one means to determine the line that best fits the data, and here we will refer to this method 
as linear regression. 

...
HOW TO 

Given data of input and corresponding outputs from a linear function, find the best fit line using linear 
regression. 

1. Enter the input in List 1 (L1). 
2. Enter the output in List 2 (L2). 
3. On a graphing utility, select Linear Regression (LinReg). 

EXAMPLE 4 

Finding a Least Squares Regression Line 
Find the least squares regression line using the cricket-chirp data in Table 2. 

Solution 
1. Enter the input (chirps) in List 1 (L1). 
2. Enter the output (temperature) in List 2 (L2). See Table 2. 

6 Technically, the method minimizes the sum of the squared differences in the vertical direction between the line and the data values. 
7 For example, http://www.shodor.org/unchem/math/lls/leastsq.html 



370     4 • Linear Functions

L1 44 35 20.4 33 31 35 18.5 37 26 

L2 80.5 70.5 57 66 68 72 52 73.5 53 

Table 2 

3. On a graphing utility, select Linear Regression (LinReg). Using the cricket chirp data from earlier, with technology we 
obtain the equation: 

Analysis 
Notice that this line is quite similar to the equation we “eyeballed” but should fit the data better. Notice also that using 
this equation would change our prediction for the temperature when hearing 30 chirps in 15 seconds from 66 degrees 
to: 

The graph of the scatter plot with the least squares regression line is shown in Figure 6. 

Figure 6 

 Q&A Will there ever be a case where two different lines will serve as the best fit for the data? 

No. There is only one best fit line. 

Distinguishing Between Linear and Nonlinear Models 
As we saw above with the cricket-chirp model, some data exhibit strong linear trends, but other data, like the final exam 
scores plotted by age, are clearly nonlinear. Most calculators and computer software can also provide us with the 
correlation coefficient, which is a measure of how closely the line fits the data. Many graphing calculators require the 
user to turn a "diagnostic on" selection to find the correlation coefficient, which mathematicians label as  The 
correlation coefficient provides an easy way to get an idea of how close to a line the data falls. 
We should compute the correlation coefficient only for data that follows a linear pattern or to determine the degree to 
which a data set is linear. If the data exhibits a nonlinear pattern, the correlation coefficient for a linear regression is 
meaningless. To get a sense for the relationship between the value of  and the graph of the data, Figure 7 shows some 
large data sets with their correlation coefficients. Remember, for all plots, the horizontal axis shows the input and the 
vertical axis shows the output. 

Access for free at openstax.org



4.3 • Fitting Linear Models to Data     371

Figure 7 Plotted data and related correlation coefficients. (credit: “DenisBoigelot,” Wikimedia Commons) 

Correlation Coefficient 

The correlation coefficient is a value,  between –1 and 1. 

•  suggests a positive (increasing) relationship 
•  suggests a negative (decreasing) relationship 
• The closer the value is to 0, the more scattered the data. 
• The closer the value is to 1 or –1, the less scattered the data is. 

EXAMPLE 5 

Finding a Correlation Coefficient 
Calculate the correlation coefficient for cricket-chirp data in Table 1. 

Solution 
Because the data appear to follow a linear pattern, we can use technology to calculate  Enter the inputs and 
corresponding outputs and select the Linear Regression. The calculator will also provide you with the correlation 
coefficient,  This value is very close to 1, which suggests a strong increasing linear relationship. 
Note: For some calculators, the Diagnostics must be turned "on" in order to get the correlation coefficient when linear 
regression is performed: [2nd]>[0]>[alpha][x–1], then scroll to DIAGNOSTICSON. 

Fitting a Regression Line to a Set of Data 
Once we determine that a set of data is linear using the correlation coefficient, we can use the regression line to make 
predictions. As we learned above, a regression line is a line that is closest to the data in the scatter plot, which means 
that only one such line is a best fit for the data. 

EXAMPLE 6 

Using a Regression Line to Make Predictions 
Gasoline consumption in the United States has been steadily increasing. Consumption data from 1994 to 2004 is shown 
in Table 3.8  Determine whether the trend is linear, and if so, find a model for the data. Use the model to predict the 
consumption in 2008. 

8 http://www.bts.gov/publications/national_transportation_statistics/2005/html/table_04_10.html 



372     4 • Linear Functions

Year '94 '95 '96 '97 '98 '99 '00 '01 '02 '03 '04 

Consumption (billions of gallons) 113 116 118 119 123 125 126 128 131 133 136 

Table 3 

The scatter plot of the data, including the least squares regression line, is shown in Figure 8. 

Figure 8 

Solution 
We can introduce a new input variable,  representing years since 1994. 
The least squares regression equation is: 

Using technology, the correlation coefficient was calculated to be 0.9965, suggesting a very strong increasing linear 
trend. 
Using this to predict consumption in 2008 

The model predicts 144.244 billion gallons of gasoline consumption in 2008. 

 TRY IT #2 Use the model we created using technology in Example 6 to predict the gas consumption in 2011. 
Is this an interpolation or an extrapolation? 

 MEDIA 

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with fitting linear models to data. 

Introduction to Regression Analysis (https://openstax.org/l/introregress) 
Linear Regression (https://openstax.org/l/linearregress) 

Access for free at openstax.org



4.3 • Fitting Linear Models to Data     373

 4.3 SECTION EXERCISES 
Verbal 

1 . Describe what it means if  2 . What is interpolation when  3 . What is extrapolation when 
there is a model breakdown using a linear model? using a linear model? 
when using a linear model. 

4 . Explain the difference  5 . Explain how to interpret the 
between a positive and a absolute value of a 
negative correlation correlation coefficient. 
coefficient. 

Algebraic 

6 . A regression was run to determine whether there is  7 . A regression was run to determine whether there is 
a relationship between hours of TV watched per a relationship between the diameter of a tree (  , 
day  and number of sit-ups a person can do in inches) and the tree’s age (  , in years). The 
The results of the regression are given below. Use results of the regression are given below. Use this 
this to predict the number of sit-ups a person who to predict the age of a tree with diameter 10 inches. 
watches 11 hours of TV can do. 

For the following exercises, draw a scatter plot for the data provided. Does the data appear to be linearly related? 
8 . 9 . 

0 2 4 6 8 10 1 2 3 4 5 6 

–22 –19 –15 –11 –6 –2 46 50 59 75 100 136 

10 . 11 . 
100 250 300 450 600 750 1 3 5 7 9 11 

12 12.6 13.1 14 14.5 15.2 1 9 28 65 125 216 



374     4 • Linear Functions

12 . For the following data, draw a scatter plot. If we 13 . For the following data, draw a scatter plot. If 
wanted to know when the population would reach we wanted to know when the temperature 
15,000, would the answer involve interpolation or would reach 28°F, would the answer involve 
extrapolation? Eyeball the line, and estimate the interpolation or extrapolation? Eyeball the line 
answer. and estimate the answer. 

Year Population Temperature,°F 16 18 20 25 30 

1990 11,500 Time, seconds 46 50 54 55 62 

1995 12,100 

2000 12,700 

2005 13,000 

2010 13,750 

Graphical 

For the following exercises, match each scatterplot with one of the four specified correlations in Figure 9 and Figure 10. 

Figure 9 

Figure 10 
14 .  15 .  16 . 
17 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



4.3 • Fitting Linear Models to Data     375

For the following exercises, draw a best-fit line for the plotted data. 
18 . 

19 . 

20 . 

21 . 



376     4 • Linear Functions

Numeric 

22 . The U.S. Census tracks the  23 . The U.S. import of wine (in  24 . Table 6 shows the year and 
percentage of persons 25 hectoliters) for several the number of people 
years or older who are years is given in Table 5. unemployed in a particular 
college graduates. That Determine whether the city for several years. 
data for several years is trend appears linear. If so, Determine whether the 
given in Table 4.9 and assuming the trend trend appears linear. If so, 
Determine whether the continues, in what year will and assuming the trend 
trend appears linear. If so, imports exceed 12,000 continues, in what year will 
and assuming the trend hectoliters? the number of 
continues, in what year will unemployed reach 5? 
the percentage exceed Year Imports 
35%? 

Year Number 

Year Percent 1992 2665 Unemployed 
Graduates 

1994 2688 1990 750 
1990 21.3 

1996 3565 1992 670 
1992 21.4 

1998 4129 1994 650 
1994 22.2 

2000 4584 1996 605 
1996 23.6 

2002 5655 1998 550 
1998 24.4 

2004 6549 2000 510 
2000 25.6 

2006 7950 2002 460 
2002 26.7 

2008 8487 2004 420 
2004 27.7 

2009 9462 2006 380 
2006 28 

Table 5 2008 320 
2008 29.4 

Table 6 
Table 4 

Technology 

For the following exercises, use each set of data to calculate the regression line using a calculator or other technology 
tool, and determine the correlation coefficient to 3 decimal places of accuracy. 
25 . 26 . 

8 15 26 31 56 5 7 10 12 15 

23 41 53 72 103 4 12 17 22 24 

9 Based on data from http://www.census.gov/hhes/socdemo/education/data/cps/historical/index.html. Accessed 5/1/2014. 

Access for free at openstax.org



4.3 • Fitting Linear Models to Data     377

27 . 28 . 

3 21.9 10 18.54 4 44.8 

4 22.22 11 15.76 5 43.1 

5 22.74 12 13.68 6 38.8 

6 22.26 13 14.1 7 39 

7 20.78 14 14.02 8 38 

8 17.6 15 11.94 9 32.7 

9 16.52 16 12.76 10 30.1 

11 29.3 

12 27 

13 25.8 

29 . 30 . 
21 25 30 31 40 50 

17 11 2 –1 –18 –40 100 2000 

80 1798 

60 1589 

55 1580 

40 1390 

20 1202 

31 . 
900 988 1000 1010 1200 1205 

70 80 82 84 105 108 

Extensions 

32 . Graph  Pick a set of five ordered  33 . Graph  Pick a set of five ordered 
pairs using inputs  and use linear pairs using inputs  and use linear 
regression to verify that the function is a good fit regression to verify the function. 
for the data. 



378     4 • Linear Functions

For the following exercises, consider this scenario: The profit of a company decreased steadily over a ten-year span. The 
following ordered pairs shows dollars and the number of units sold in hundreds and the profit in thousands of dollars 
over the ten-year span, (number of units sold, profit) for specific recorded years: 

34 . Use linear regression to  35 . Find to the nearest tenth  36 . Find to the nearest tenth 
determine a function and interpret the and interpret the 
where the profit in x-intercept. y-intercept. 
thousands of dollars 
depends on the number of 
units sold in hundreds. 

Real-World Applications 

For the following exercises, consider this scenario: The population of a city increased steadily over a ten-year span. The 
following ordered pairs shows the population and the year over the ten-year span, (population, year) for specific 
recorded years: 

37 . Use linear regression to determine a function  38 . Predict when the population will hit 8,000. 
where the year depends on the population. Round 
to three decimal places of accuracy. 

For the following exercises, consider this scenario: The profit of a company increased steadily over a ten-year span. The 
following ordered pairs show the number of units sold in hundreds and the profit in thousands of dollars over the ten 
year span, (number of units sold, profit) for specific recorded years: 

39 . Use linear regression to determine a function y,  40 . Predict when the profit will exceed one million 
where the profit in thousands of dollars depends dollars. 
on the number of units sold in hundreds. 

For the following exercises, consider this scenario: The profit of a company decreased steadily over a ten-year span. The 
following ordered pairs show dollars and the number of units sold in hundreds and the profit in thousands of dollars 
over the ten-year span (number of units sold, profit) for specific recorded years: 

41 . Use linear regression to determine a function y,  42 . Predict when the profit will dip below the $25,000 
where the profit in thousands of dollars depends threshold. 
on the number of units sold in hundreds. 

Access for free at openstax.org



4 • Chapter Review     379

Chapter Review 
Key Terms 
correlation coefficient a value,  between –1 and 1 that indicates the degree of linear correlation of variables, or how 

closely a regression line fits a data set. 
decreasing linear function  a function with a negative slope: If 
extrapolation predicting a value outside the domain and range of the data 
horizontal line  a line defined by  where  is a real number. The slope of a horizontal line is 0. 
increasing linear function  a function with a positive slope: If 
interpolation predicting a value inside the domain and range of the data 
least squares regression a statistical technique for fitting a line to data in a way that minimizes the differences 

between the line and data values 
linear function  a function with a constant rate of change that is a polynomial of degree 1, and whose graph is a 

straight line 
model breakdown when a model no longer applies after a certain point 
parallel lines  two or more lines with the same slope 
perpendicular lines  two lines that intersect at right angles and have slopes that are negative reciprocals of each other 
point-slope form  the equation for a line that represents a linear function of the form 
slope  the ratio of the change in output values to the change in input values; a measure of the steepness of a line 
slope-intercept form  the equation for a line that represents a linear function in the form 
vertical line  a line defined by  where  is a real number. The slope of a vertical line is undefined. 

Key Concepts 
4.1 Linear Functions 

• Linear functions can be represented in words, function notation, tabular form, and graphical form. See Example 1. 
• An increasing linear function results in a graph that slants upward from left to right and has a positive slope. A 

decreasing linear function results in a graph that slants downward from left to right and has a negative slope. A 
constant linear function results in a graph that is a horizontal line. See Example 2. 

• Slope is a rate of change. The slope of a linear function can be calculated by dividing the difference between 
y-values by the difference in corresponding x-values of any two points on the line. See Example 3 and Example 4. 

• An equation for a linear function can be written from a graph. See Example 5. 
• The equation for a linear function can be written if the slope  and initial value  are known. See Example 6 and 

Example 7. 
• A linear function can be used to solve real-world problems given information in different forms. See Example 8,

Example 9, and Example 10. 
• Linear functions can be graphed by plotting points or by using the y-intercept and slope. See Example 11 and 

Example 12. 
• Graphs of linear functions may be transformed by using shifts up, down, left, or right, as well as through stretches, 

compressions, and reflections. See Example 13. 
• The equation for a linear function can be written by interpreting the graph. See Example 14. 
• The x-intercept is the point at which the graph of a linear function crosses the x-axis. See Example 15. 
• Horizontal lines are written in the form,  See Example 16. 
• Vertical lines are written in the form,  See Example 17. 
• Parallel lines have the same slope. Perpendicular lines have negative reciprocal slopes, assuming neither is vertical. 

See Example 18. 
• A line parallel to another line, passing through a given point, may be found by substituting the slope value of the 

line and the x- and y-values of the given point into the equation,  and using the  that results. 
Similarly, the point-slope form of an equation can also be used. See Example 19. 

• A line perpendicular to another line, passing through a given point, may be found in the same manner, with the 
exception of using the negative reciprocal slope. See Example 20 and Example 21. 

4.2 Modeling with Linear Functions 
• We can use the same problem strategies that we would use for any type of function. 
• When modeling and solving a problem, identify the variables and look for key values, including the slope and 

y-intercept. See Example 1. 
• Draw a diagram, where appropriate. See Example 2 and Example 3. 
• Check for reasonableness of the answer. 



380     4 • Exercises

• Linear models may be built by identifying or calculating the slope and using the y-intercept. 
◦ The x-intercept may be found by setting  which is setting the expression  equal to 0. 
◦ The point of intersection of a system of linear equations is the point where the x- and y-values are the same. See 

Example 4. 
◦ A graph of the system may be used to identify the points where one line falls below (or above) the other line. 

4.3 Fitting Linear Models to Data 
• Scatter plots show the relationship between two sets of data. See Example 1. 
• Scatter plots may represent linear or non-linear models. 
• The line of best fit may be estimated or calculated, using a calculator or statistical software. See Example 2. 
• Interpolation can be used to predict values inside the domain and range of the data, whereas extrapolation can be 

used to predict values outside the domain and range of the data. See Example 3. 
• The correlation coefficient,  indicates the degree of linear relationship between data. See Example 4. 
• A regression line best fits the data. See Example 5. 
• The least squares regression line is found by minimizing the squares of the distances of points from a line passing 

through the data and may be used to make predictions regarding either of the variables. See Example 6. 

Exercises 
Review Exercises 
Linear Functions 
1 . Determine whether the  2 . Determine whether the 3 . Determine whether the 

algebraic equation is linear. algebraic equation is linear. function is increasing or 
decreasing. 

4 . Determine whether the 5 . Given each set of  6 . Given each set of 
function is increasing or information, find a linear information, find a linear 
decreasing. equation that satisfies the equation that satisfies the 

given conditions, if possible. given conditions, if possible. 
Passes through  and x-intercept at  and 

y-intercept at 
7 . Find the slope of the line shown in the graph. 8 . Find the slope of the line graphed. 

Access for free at openstax.org



4 • Exercises     381

9 . Write an equation in slope-intercept form for the 10 . Does the following table 
line shown. represent a linear function? If 

so, find the linear equation 
that models the data. 

x –4 0 2 10 

g(x) 18 –2 –12 –52 

11 . Does the following table 12. On June 1st, a company has 
represent a linear function? If $4,000,000 profit. If the 
so, find the linear equation that company then loses 
models the data. 150,000 dollars per day 

thereafter in the month of 
x 6 8 12 26 June, what is the 

company’s profit nth day 
g(x) –8 –12 –18 –46 after June 1st? 

For the following exercises, determine whether the lines given by the equations below are parallel, perpendicular, or 
neither parallel nor perpendicular: 

13 .  14 . 

For the following exercises, find the x- and y- intercepts of the given equation 
15 .  16 . 

For the following exercises, use the descriptions of the pairs of lines to find the slopes of Line 1 and Line 2. Is each pair of 
lines parallel, perpendicular, or neither? 
17 . Line 1: Passes through  18 . Line 1: Passes through 19 . Write an equation for a line 

 and  and perpendicular to 
Line 2: Passes through Line 2: Passes through  and passing 

 and  and through the point (5, 20). 
20 . Find the equation of a line 21 . Sketch a graph of the 22 . Find the point of 

with a y- intercept of linear function intersection for the 2 linear 
and slope functions: 



382     4 • Exercises

23 . A car rental company 
offers two plans for renting 
a car. 
Plan A: 25 dollars per day 
and 10 cents per mile 
Plan B: 50 dollars per day 
with free unlimited mileage 
How many miles would you 
need to drive for plan B to 
save you money? 

Modeling with Linear Functions 
24 . Find the area of a triangle 25 . A town’s population  26 . The number of people 

bounded by the y axis, the increases at a constant afflicted with the common 
line  and rate. In 2010 the cold in the winter months 
the line perpendicular to population was 55,000. By dropped steadily by 50 
that passes through the 2012 the population had each year since 2004 until 
origin. increased to 76,000. If this 2010. In 2004, 875 people 

trend continues, predict were inflicted. 
the population in 2016. Find the linear function 

that models the number of 
people afflicted with the 
common cold C as a 
function of the year, 
When will no one be 
afflicted? 

For the following exercises, use the graph in Figure 1 showing the profit,  in thousands of dollars, of a company in a 
given year,  where  represents years since 1980. 

Figure 1 
27 . Find the linear function y, where y depends on  28 . Find and interpret the y-intercept. 

the number of years since 1980. 

For the following exercise, consider this scenario: In 2004, a school population was 1,700. By 2012 the population had 
grown to 2,500. 
29 . Assume the population is changing linearly. 

ⓐ How much did the population grow between 
the year 2004 and 2012? 
ⓑ What is the average population growth per 
year? 
ⓒ Find an equation for the population, P, of the 
school t years after 2004. 

Access for free at openstax.org



4 • Exercises     383

For the following exercises, consider this scenario: In 2000, the moose population in a park was measured to be 6,500. 
By 2010, the population was measured to be 12,500. Assume the population continues to change linearly. 
30 . Find a formula for the 31 . What does your model 

moose population, . predict the moose 
population to be in 2020? 

For the following exercises, consider this scenario: The median home values in subdivisions Pima Central and East Valley 
(adjusted for inflation) are shown in Table 1. Assume that the house values are changing linearly. 

Year Pima Central East Valley 

1970 32,000 120,250 

2010 85,000 150,000 

Table 1 

32 . In which subdivision have 33 . If these trends were to 
home values increased at a continue, what would be 
higher rate? the median home value in 

Pima Central in 2015? 

Fitting Linear Models to Data 
34 . Draw a scatter plot for the 35 . Draw a scatter plot for the 36 . Eight students were asked 

data in Table 2. Then data in Table 3. If we to estimate their score on a 
determine whether the wanted to know when the 10-point quiz. Their 
data appears to be linearly population would reach estimated and actual 
related. 15,000, would the answer scores are given in Table 4. 

involve interpolation or Plot the points, then sketch 
0 -105 extrapolation? a line that fits the data. 

2 -50 Year Population Predicted Actual 

4 1 1990 5,600 6 6 

6 55 1995 5,950 7 7 

8 105 2000 6,300 7 8 

10 160 2005 6,600 8 8 

Table 2 2010 6,900 7 9 

Table 3 9 10 

10 10 

10 9 

Table 4 



384     4 • Exercises

37 . Draw a best-fit line for the plotted 
data. 

For the following exercises, consider the data in Table 5, which shows the percent of unemployed in a city of people 25 
years or older who are college graduates is given below, by year. 

Year 2000 2002 2005 2007 2010 

Percent Graduates 6.5 7.0 7.4 8.2 9.0 

Table 5 

38 . Determine whether the 39 . In what year will the  40 . Based on the set of data given 
trend appears to be linear. percentage exceed 12%? in Table 6, calculate the 
If so, and assuming the regression line using a 
trend continues, find a calculator or other technology 
linear regression model to tool, and determine the 
predict the percent of correlation coefficient to three 
unemployed in a given decimal places. 
year to three decimal 
places. 17 20 23 26 29 

15 25 31 37 40 

Table 6 

41 . Based on the set of data given 
in Table 7, calculate the 
regression line using a 
calculator or other technology 
tool, and determine the 
correlation coefficient to three 
decimal places. 

10 12 15 18 20 

36 34 30 28 22 

Table 7 

Access for free at openstax.org



4 • Exercises     385

For the following exercises, consider this scenario: The population of a city increased steadily over a ten-year span. The 
following ordered pairs show the population and the year over the ten-year span (population, year) for specific recorded 
years: 

42 . Use linear regression to 43 . Predict when the  44 . What is the correlation 
determine a function population will hit 12,000. coefficient for this model 
where the year depends on to three decimal places of 
the population, to three accuracy? 
decimal places of accuracy. 

45 . According to the model, 
what is the population in 
2014? 

Practice Test 
1 . Determine whether the 2 . Determine whether the 3 . Determine whether the 

following algebraic equation following function is following function is 
can be written as a linear increasing or decreasing. increasing or decreasing. 
function. 

4 . Find a linear equation that 5 . Find a linear equation, that 6 . Find the slope of the line in Figure 
passes through (5, 1) and (3, has an x intercept at (–4, 0) 1. 
–9), if possible. and a y-intercept at (0, –6), if 

possible. 

Figure 1 



386     4 • Exercises

7 . Write an equation for line in Figure 2. 8 . Does Table 1 represent a linear function? If so, find 
a linear equation that models the data. 

–6 0 2 4 

14 32 38 44 

Table 1 

Figure 2 

9 . Does Table 2 represent a linear function? If so, find 10 . At 6 am, an online 
a linear equation that models the data. company has sold 120 

items that day. If the 
x 1 3 7 11 company sells an average 

of 30 items per hour for 
g(x) 4 9 19 12 the remainder of the day, 

write an expression to 
Table 2 represent the number of 

items that were sold  after 
6 am. 

For the following exercises, determine whether the lines given by the equations below are parallel, perpendicular, or 
neither parallel nor perpendicular. 

11 . 12 . 13 . Find the x- and y-intercepts 
of the equation 

14 . Given below are 15 . Write an equation for a line 16 . Sketch a line with a 
descriptions of two lines. perpendicular to y-intercept of  and 
Find the slopes of Line 1  and passing slope 
and Line 2. Is the pair of through the point 
lines parallel, 
perpendicular, or neither? 
Line 1: Passes through 

 and 
Line 2: Passes through 

 and 

Access for free at openstax.org



4 • Exercises     387

17 . Graph of the linear 18 . For the two linear 19 . A car rental company 
function functions, find the point of offers two plans for renting 

intersection: a car. 
Plan A: $25 per day and 
$0.10 per mile 
Plan B: $40 per day with 
free unlimited mileage 
How many miles would you 
need to drive for plan B to 
save you money? 

20 . Find the area of a triangle 21 . A town’s population 22 . The number of people 
bounded by the y axis, the increases at a constant afflicted with the common 
line  and rate. In 2010 the cold in the winter months 
the line perpendicular to population was 65,000. By dropped steadily by 25 
that passes through the 2012 the population had each year since 2002 until 
origin. increased to 90,000. 2012. In 2002, 8,040 people 

Assuming this trend were inflicted. Find the 
continues, predict the linear function that models 
population in 2018. the number of people 

afflicted with the common 
cold  as a function of the 
year,  When will less than 
6,000 people be afflicted? 

For the following exercises, use the graph in Figure 3, showing the profit,  in thousands of dollars, of a company in a 
given year,  where  represents years since 1980. 

Figure 3 
23 . Find the linear function 24 . Find and interpret the 25 . In 2004, a school 

where  depends on  the y-intercept. population was 1250. By 
number of years since 2012 the population had 
1980. dropped to 875. Assume 

the population is changing 
linearly. 
ⓐ How much did the 
population drop between 
the year 2004 and 2012? 
ⓑ What is the average 
population decline per 
year? 
ⓒ Find an equation for 
the population, P, of the 
school t years after 2004. 



388     4 • Exercises

26 . Draw a scatter plot for the data provided in Table 27 . Draw a best-fit line for the plotted data. 
3. Then determine whether the data appears to be 
linearly related. 

0 2 4 6 8 10 

–450 –200 10 265 500 755 

Table 3 

For the following exercises, use Table 4, which shows the percent of unemployed persons 25 years or older who are 
college graduates in a particular city, by year. 

Year 2000 2002 2005 2007 2010 

Percent Graduates 8.5 8.0 7.2 6.7 6.4 

Table 4 

28 . Determine whether the 29 . In what year will the 30 . Based on the set of data given in 
trend appears linear. If so, percentage drop below Table 5, calculate the regression line 
and assuming the trend 4%? using a calculator or other technology 
continues, find a linear tool, and determine the correlation 
regression model to coefficient. Round to three decimal 
predict the percent of places of accuracy. 
unemployed in a given 
year to three decimal x 16 18 20 24 26 
places. 

y 106 110 115 120 125 

Table 5 

For the following exercises, consider this scenario: The population of a city increased steadily over a ten-year span. The 
following ordered pairs shows the population (in hundreds) and the year over the ten-year span, (population, year) for 
specific recorded years: 

31 . Use linear regression to 32 . Predict when the 33 . What is the correlation 
determine a function y, population will hit 20,000. coefficient for this model? 
where the year depends on 
the population. Round to 
three decimal places of 
accuracy. 

Access for free at openstax.org



5 • Introduction to Polynomial and Rational Functions          389

5 POLYNOMIAL AND RATIONAL 
FUNCTIONS 

Whether they think about it in mathematical terms or not, scuba divers must consider the impact of functional 
relationships in order to remain safe. The gas laws, which are a series of relations and equations that describe the 
behavior of most gases, play a core role in diving. This diver, near the wreck of a World War II Japanese ocean liner 
turned troop transport, must remain attentive to gas laws during their dive and as they ascend to the surface. (credit: 
"Aikoku - Aft Gun": modification of work by montereydiver/flickr) 

Chapter Outline 
5.1 Quadratic Functions 
5.2 Power Functions and Polynomial Functions 
5.3 Graphs of Polynomial Functions 
5.4 Dividing Polynomials 
5.5 Zeros of Polynomial Functions 
5.6 Rational Functions 
5.7 Inverses and Radical Functions 
5.8 Modeling Using Variation 

Introduction to Polynomial and Rational Functions 
You don't need to dive very deep to feel the effects of pressure. As a person in their neighborhood pool moves eight, ten, 
twelve feet down, they often feel pain in their ears as a result of water and air pressure differentials. Pressure plays a 
much greater role at ocean diving depths. 
Scuba and free divers are constantly negotiating the effects of pressure in order to experience enjoyable, safe, and 
productive dives. Gases in a person's respiratory system and diving apparatus interact according to certain physical 
properties, which upon discovery and evaluation are collectively known as the gas laws. Some are conceptually simple, 
such as the inverse relationship regarding pressure and volume, and others are more complex. While their formulas 
seem more straightforward than many you will encounter in this chapter, the gas laws are generally polynomial 
expressions. 

5.1 Quadratic Functions 
Learning Objectives 
In this section, you will: 

Recognize characteristics of parabolas. 
Understand how the graph of a parabola is related to its quadratic function. 
Determine a quadratic function’s minimum or maximum value. 
Solve problems involving a quadratic function’s minimum or maximum value. 



390     5 • Polynomial and Rational Functions

Figure 1 An array of satellite dishes. (credit: Matthew Colvin de Valle, Flickr) 
Curved antennas, such as the ones shown in Figure 1, are commonly used to focus microwaves and radio waves to 
transmit television and telephone signals, as well as satellite and spacecraft communication. The cross-section of the 
antenna is in the shape of a parabola, which can be described by a quadratic function. 
In this section, we will investigate quadratic functions, which frequently model problems involving area and projectile 
motion. Working with quadratic functions can be less complex than working with higher degree functions, so they 
provide a good opportunity for a detailed study of function behavior. 

Recognizing Characteristics of Parabolas 
The graph of a quadratic function is a U-shaped curve called a parabola. One important feature of the graph is that it has 
an extreme point, called the vertex. If the parabola opens up, the vertex represents the lowest point on the graph, or the 
minimum value of the quadratic function. If the parabola opens down, the vertex represents the highest point on the 
graph, or the maximum value. In either case, the vertex is a turning point on the graph. The graph is also symmetric with 
a vertical line drawn through the vertex, called the axis of symmetry. These features are illustrated in Figure 2. 

Figure 2 
The y-intercept is the point at which the parabola crosses the y-axis. The x-intercepts are the points at which the 
parabola crosses the x-axis. If they exist, the x-intercepts represent the zeros, or roots, of the quadratic function, the 
values of  at which 

EXAMPLE 1 

Identifying the Characteristics of a Parabola 
Determine the vertex, axis of symmetry, zeros, and  intercept of the parabola shown in Figure 3. 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.1 • Quadratic Functions     391

Figure 3 

Solution 
The vertex is the turning point of the graph. We can see that the vertex is at  Because this parabola opens upward, 
the axis of symmetry is the vertical line that intersects the parabola at the vertex. So the axis of symmetry is  This 
parabola does not cross the  axis, so it has no zeros. It crosses the  axis at  so this is the y-intercept. 

Understanding How the Graphs of Parabolas are Related to Their Quadratic 
Functions 
The general form of a quadratic function presents the function in the form 

where  and  are real numbers and  If  the parabola opens upward. If  the parabola opens 
downward. We can use the general form of a parabola to find the equation for the axis of symmetry. 

The axis of symmetry is defined by  If we use the quadratic formula,  to solve 
 for the  intercepts, or zeros, we find the value of  halfway between them is always  the 

equation for the axis of symmetry. 

Figure 4 represents the graph of the quadratic function written in general form as  In this form, 
 and  Because  the parabola opens upward. The axis of symmetry is  This also 

makes sense because we can see from the graph that the vertical line  divides the graph in half. The vertex always 
occurs along the axis of symmetry. For a parabola that opens upward, the vertex occurs at the lowest point on the graph, 
in this instance,  The  intercepts, those points where the parabola crosses the  axis, occur at  and 

Figure 4 
The standard form of a quadratic function presents the function in the form 



392     5 • Polynomial and Rational Functions

where  is the vertex. Because the vertex appears in the standard form of the quadratic function, this form is also 
known as the vertex form of a quadratic function. 
As with the general form, if  the parabola opens upward and the vertex is a minimum. If  the parabola opens 
downward, and the vertex is a maximum. Figure 5 represents the graph of the quadratic function written in standard 
form as  Since  in this example,  In this form,  and 
Because  the parabola opens downward. The vertex is at 

Figure 5 

The standard form is useful for determining how the graph is transformed from the graph of  Figure 6 is the 
graph of this basic function. 

Figure 6 
If  the graph shifts upward, whereas if  the graph shifts downward. In Figure 5,  so the graph is shifted 
4 units upward. If  the graph shifts toward the right and if  the graph shifts to the left. In Figure 5,  so 
the graph is shifted 2 units to the left. The magnitude of  indicates the stretch of the graph. If  the point 
associated with a particular  value shifts farther from the x-axis, so the graph appears to become narrower, and there 
is a vertical stretch. But if  the point associated with a particular  value shifts closer to the x-axis, so the graph 
appears to become wider, but in fact there is a vertical compression. In Figure 5,  so the graph becomes narrower. 
The standard form and the general form are equivalent methods of describing the same function. We can see this by 
expanding out the general form and setting it equal to the standard form. 

For the linear terms to be equal, the coefficients must be equal. 

This is the axis of symmetry we defined earlier. Setting the constant terms equal: 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.1 • Quadratic Functions     393

In practice, though, it is usually easier to remember that k is the output value of the function when the input is  so 

Forms of Quadratic Functions 

A quadratic function is a polynomial function of degree two. The graph of a quadratic function is a parabola. 

The general form of a quadratic function is  where  and  are real numbers and 

The standard form of a quadratic function is  where 

The vertex  is located at 

...
HOW TO 

Given a graph of a quadratic function, write the equation of the function in general form. 

1. Identify the horizontal shift of the parabola; this value is  Identify the vertical shift of the parabola; this value is 

2. Substitute the values of the horizontal and vertical shift for  and  in the function 
3. Substitute the values of any point, other than the vertex, on the graph of the parabola for  and 
4. Solve for the stretch factor, 
5. Expand and simplify to write in general form. 

EXAMPLE 2 

Writing the Equation of a Quadratic Function from the Graph 
Write an equation for the quadratic function  in Figure 7 as a transformation of  and then expand the 
formula, and simplify terms to write the equation in general form. 



394     5 • Polynomial and Rational Functions

Figure 7 

Solution 
We can see the graph of g is the graph of  shifted to the left 2 and down 3, giving a formula in the form 

Substituting the coordinates of a point on the curve, such as  we can solve for the stretch factor. 

In standard form, the algebraic model for this graph is 

To write this in general polynomial form, we can expand the formula and simplify terms. 

Notice that the horizontal and vertical shifts of the basic graph of the quadratic function determine the location of the 
vertex of the parabola; the vertex is unaffected by stretches and compressions. 

Analysis 
We can check our work using the table feature on a graphing utility. First enter  Next, select 

 then use  and  and select  See Table 1. 

–6 –4 –2 0 2 

5 –1 –3 –1 5 

Table 1 

The ordered pairs in the table correspond to points on the graph. 

 TRY IT #1 A coordinate grid has been superimposed over the quadratic path of a basketball in Figure 8. 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.1 • Quadratic Functions     395

Assume that the point (–4, 7) is the highest point of the basketball’s trajectory. Find an equation for 
the path of the ball. Does the shooter make the basket? 

Figure 8 (credit: modification of work by Dan Meyer) 

...
HOW TO 

Given a quadratic function in general form, find the vertex of the parabola. 

1. Identify 
2. Find  the x-coordinate of the vertex, by substituting  and  into 
3. Find  the y-coordinate of the vertex, by evaluating 

EXAMPLE 3 

Finding the Vertex of a Quadratic Function 
Find the vertex of the quadratic function  Rewrite the quadratic in standard form (vertex form). 

Solution 

Rewriting into standard form, the stretch factor will be the same as the  in the original quadratic. First, find the 
horizontal coordinate of the vertex. Then find the vertical coordinate of the vertex. Substitute the values into standard 
form, using the "  " from the general form. 



396     5 • Polynomial and Rational Functions

The standard form of a quadratic function prior to writing the function then becomes the following: 

Analysis 
One reason we may want to identify the vertex of the parabola is that this point will inform us where the maximum or 
minimum value of the output occurs,  and where it occurs, 

 TRY IT #2 Given the equation  write the equation in general form and then in standard 
form. 

Finding the Domain and Range of a Quadratic Function 
Any number can be the input value of a quadratic function. Therefore, the domain of any quadratic function is all real 
numbers. Because parabolas have a maximum or a minimum point, the range is restricted. Since the vertex of a 
parabola will be either a maximum or a minimum, the range will consist of all y-values greater than or equal to the 
y-coordinate at the turning point or less than or equal to the y-coordinate at the turning point, depending on whether 
the parabola opens up or down. 

Domain and Range of a Quadratic Function 

The domain of any quadratic function is all real numbers unless the context of the function presents some 
restrictions. 

The range of a quadratic function written in general form  with a positive  value is 
 or ∞  the range of a quadratic function written in general form with a negative  value 

is  or ∞

The range of a quadratic function written in standard form  with a positive  value is 
the range of a quadratic function written in standard form with a negative  value is 

...
HOW TO 

Given a quadratic function, find the domain and range. 

1. Identify the domain of any quadratic function as all real numbers. 
2. Determine whether  is positive or negative. If  is positive, the parabola has a minimum. If  is negative, the 

parabola has a maximum. 
3. Determine the maximum or minimum value of the parabola, 
4. If the parabola has a minimum, the range is given by  or ∞  If the parabola has a maximum, the 

range is given by  or ∞

EXAMPLE 4 

Finding the Domain and Range of a Quadratic Function 
Find the domain and range of 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.1 • Quadratic Functions     397

Solution 
As with any quadratic function, the domain is all real numbers. 
Because  is negative, the parabola opens downward and has a maximum value. We need to determine the maximum 
value. We can begin by finding the  value of the vertex. 

The maximum value is given by 

The range is  or ∞

 TRY IT #3 Find the domain and range of 

Determining the Maximum and Minimum Values of Quadratic Functions 
The output of the quadratic function at the vertex is the maximum or minimum value of the function, depending on the 
orientation of the parabola. We can see the maximum and minimum values in Figure 9. 

Figure 9 
There are many real-world scenarios that involve finding the maximum or minimum value of a quadratic function, such 
as applications involving area and revenue. 



398     5 • Polynomial and Rational Functions

EXAMPLE 5 

Finding the Maximum Value of a Quadratic Function 
A backyard farmer wants to enclose a rectangular space for a new garden within her fenced backyard. She has 
purchased 80 feet of wire fencing to enclose three sides, and she will use a section of the backyard fence as the fourth 
side. 

ⓐ Find a formula for the area enclosed by the fence if the sides of fencing perpendicular to the existing fence have 
length 
ⓑ What dimensions should she make her garden to maximize the enclosed area? 

Solution 
Let’s use a diagram such as Figure 10 to record the given information. It is also helpful to introduce a temporary variable, 

 to represent the width of the garden and the length of the fence section parallel to the backyard fence. 

Figure 10 

ⓐ We know we have only 80 feet of fence available, and  or more simply,  This 
allows us to represent the width,  in terms of 

Now we are ready to write an equation for the area the fence encloses. We know the area of a rectangle is length 
multiplied by width, so 

This formula represents the area of the fence in terms of the variable length  The function, written in general form, 
is 

ⓑ The quadratic has a negative leading coefficient, so the graph will open downward, and the vertex will be the 
maximum value for the area. In finding the vertex, we must be careful because the equation is not written in standard 
polynomial form with decreasing powers. This is why we rewrote the function in general form above. Since  is the 
coefficient of the squared term,  and 
To find the vertex: 

The maximum value of the function is an area of 800 square feet, which occurs when  feet. When the shorter 
sides are 20 feet, there is 40 feet of fencing left for the longer side. To maximize the area, she should enclose the garden 
so the two shorter sides have length 20 feet and the longer side parallel to the existing fence has length 40 feet. 

Analysis 
This problem also could be solved by graphing the quadratic function. We can see where the maximum area occurs on a 
graph of the quadratic function in Figure 11. 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.1 • Quadratic Functions     399

Figure 11 

...
HOW TO 

Given an application involving revenue, use a quadratic equation to find the maximum. 

1. Write a quadratic equation for a revenue function. 
2. Find the vertex of the quadratic equation. 
3. Determine the y-value of the vertex. 

EXAMPLE 6 

Finding Maximum Revenue 
The unit price of an item affects its supply and demand. That is, if the unit price goes up, the demand for the item will 
usually decrease. For example, a local newspaper currently has 84,000 subscribers at a quarterly charge of $30. Market 
research has suggested that if the owners raise the price to $32, they would lose 5,000 subscribers. Assuming that 
subscriptions are linearly related to the price, what price should the newspaper charge for a quarterly subscription to 
maximize their revenue? 

Solution 
Revenue is the amount of money a company brings in. In this case, the revenue can be found by multiplying the price 
per subscription times the number of subscribers, or quantity. We can introduce variables,  for price per subscription 
and  for quantity, giving us the equation 
Because the number of subscribers changes with the price, we need to find a relationship between the variables. We 
know that currently  and  We also know that if the price rises to $32, the newspaper would lose 5,000 
subscribers, giving a second pair of values,  and  From this we can find a linear equation relating the 
two quantities. The slope will be 

This tells us the paper will lose 2,500 subscribers for each dollar they raise the price. We can then solve for the 
y-intercept. 

This gives us the linear equation  relating cost and subscribers. We now return to our revenue 
equation. 



400     5 • Polynomial and Rational Functions

We now have a quadratic function for revenue as a function of the subscription charge. To find the price that will 
maximize revenue for the newspaper, we can find the vertex. 

The model tells us that the maximum revenue will occur if the newspaper charges $31.80 for a subscription. To find what 
the maximum revenue is, we evaluate the revenue function. 

Analysis 
This could also be solved by graphing the quadratic as in Figure 12. We can see the maximum revenue on a graph of the 
quadratic function. 

Figure 12 

Finding the x- and y-Intercepts of a Quadratic Function 
Much as we did in the application problems above, we also need to find intercepts of quadratic equations for graphing 
parabolas. Recall that we find the  intercept of a quadratic by evaluating the function at an input of zero, and we find 
the  intercepts at locations where the output is zero. Notice in Figure 13 that the number of  intercepts can vary 
depending upon the location of the graph. 

Figure 13 Number of x-intercepts of a parabola 
...

HOW TO 

Given a quadratic function  find the  and x-intercepts. 

1. Evaluate  to find the y-intercept. 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.1 • Quadratic Functions     401

2. Solve the quadratic equation  to find the x-intercepts. 

EXAMPLE 7 

Finding the y- and x-Intercepts of a Parabola 
Find the y- and x-intercepts of the quadratic 

Solution 
We find the y-intercept by evaluating 

So the y-intercept is at 
For the x-intercepts, we find all solutions of 

In this case, the quadratic can be factored easily, providing the simplest method for solution. 

So the x-intercepts are at  and 

Analysis 
By graphing the function, we can confirm that the graph crosses the y-axis at  We can also confirm that the graph 
crosses the x-axis at  and  See Figure 14 

Figure 14 

Rewriting Quadratics in Standard Form 
In Example 7, the quadratic was easily solved by factoring. However, there are many quadratics that cannot be factored. 
We can solve these quadratics by first rewriting them in standard form. 

...
HOW TO 

Given a quadratic function, find the  intercepts by rewriting in standard form. 

1. Substitute  and  into 
2. Substitute  into the general form of the quadratic function to find 
3. Rewrite the quadratic in standard form using  and 
4. Solve for when the output of the function will be zero to find the  intercepts. 



402     5 • Polynomial and Rational Functions

EXAMPLE 8 

Finding the x-Intercepts of a Parabola 
Find the  intercepts of the quadratic function 

Solution 
We begin by solving for when the output will be zero. 

Because the quadratic is not easily factorable in this case, we solve for the intercepts by first rewriting the quadratic in 
standard form. 

We know that  Then we solve for  and 

So now we can rewrite in standard form. 

We can now solve for when the output will be zero. 

The graph has x-intercepts at  and 

We can check our work by graphing the given function on a graphing utility and observing the  intercepts. See Figure 
15. 

Figure 15 

Analysis 
We could have achieved the same results using the quadratic formula. Identify  and 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.1 • Quadratic Functions     403

So the x-intercepts occur at  and 

 TRY IT #4 In a Try It, we found the standard and general form for the function  Now 
find the y- and x-intercepts (if any). 

EXAMPLE 9 

Applying the Vertex and x-Intercepts of a Parabola 
A ball is thrown upward from the top of a 40 foot high building at a speed of 80 feet per second. The ball’s height above 
ground can be modeled by the equation 

ⓐ When does the ball reach the maximum height?  ⓑ What is the maximum height of the ball? 
ⓒ When does the ball hit the ground? 

Solution 
ⓐ The ball reaches the maximum height at the vertex of the parabola. 

The ball reaches a maximum height after 2.5 seconds. 

ⓑ To find the maximum height, find the  coordinate of the vertex of the parabola. 

The ball reaches a maximum height of 140 feet. 



404     5 • Polynomial and Rational Functions

ⓒ To find when the ball hits the ground, we need to determine when the height is zero, 
We use the quadratic formula. 

Because the square root does not simplify nicely, we can use a calculator to approximate the values of the solutions. 

The second answer is outside the reasonable domain of our model, so we conclude the ball will hit the ground after 
about 5.458 seconds. See Figure 16. 

Figure 16 
Note that the graph does not represent the physical path of the ball upward and downward. Keep the quantities on 
each axis in mind while interpreting the graph. 

 TRY IT #5 A rock is thrown upward from the top of a 112-foot high cliff overlooking the ocean at a speed of 
96 feet per second. The rock’s height above ocean can be modeled by the equation 

ⓐ When does the rock reach the maximum height? 
ⓑ What is the maximum height of the rock?  ⓒ When does the rock hit the ocean? 

 MEDIA 

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with quadratic equations. 

Graphing Quadratic Functions in General Form (https://openstax.org/l/graphquadgen) 
Graphing Quadratic Functions in Standard Form (https://openstax.org/l/graphquadstan) 
Quadratic Function Review (https://openstax.org/l/quadfuncrev) 
Characteristics of a Quadratic Function (https://openstax.org/l/characterquad) 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.1 • Quadratic Functions     405

 5.1 SECTION EXERCISES 
Verbal 

1 . Explain the advantage of  2 . How can the vertex of a  3 . Explain why the condition of 
writing a quadratic function parabola be used in solving  is imposed in the 
in standard form. real-world problems? definition of the quadratic 

function. 
4 . What is another name for  5 . What two algebraic 

the standard form of a methods can be used to find 
quadratic function? the horizontal intercepts of 

a quadratic function? 

Algebraic 

For the following exercises, rewrite the quadratic functions in vertex form and give the vertex. 

6 .  7 .  8 . 

9 .  10 .  11 . 

12 .  13 . 

For the following exercises, determine whether there is a minimum or maximum value to each quadratic function. Find 
the value and the axis of symmetry. 

14 .  15 .  16 . 

17 .  18 .  19 . 

20 . 

For the following exercises, determine the domain and range of the quadratic function. 

21 .  22 .  23 . 

24 .  25 . 

For the following exercises, use the vertex  and a point on the graph  to find the general form of the equation 
of the quadratic function. 
26 . 27 . 28 . 
29 . 30 . 31 . 
32 . 33 . 

Graphical 

For the following exercises, sketch a graph of the quadratic function and give the vertex, axis of symmetry, and 
intercepts. 

34 . 35 . 36 . 

37 .  38 .  39 . 



406     5 • Polynomial and Rational Functions

For the following exercises, write the equation for the graphed quadratic function. 
40 . 41 . 42 . 

43 . 44 . 45 . 

Numeric 

For the following exercises, use the table of values that represent points on the graph of a quadratic function. By 
determining the vertex and axis of symmetry, find the general form of the equation of the quadratic function. 
46 . 47 . 48 . 

–2 –1 0 1 2 –2 –1 0 1 2 –2 –1 0 1 2 

5 2 1 2 5 1 0 1 4 9 –2 1 2 1 –2 

49 . 50 . 
–2 –1 0 1 2 –2 –1 0 1 2 

–8 –3 0 1 0 8 2 0 2 8 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.1 • Quadratic Functions     407

Technology 

For the following exercises, use a calculator to find the answer. 
51 . Graph on the same set of axes the functions 52 . Graph on the same set of axes 

, , and .  and 
What appears to be the effect of changing the  and 
coefficient? What appears to be the effect of adding a 

constant? 
53 . Graph on the same set of axes 54 . The path of an object projected at a 45 degree 

, and angle with initial velocity of 80 feet per second is 
given by the function  where 

What appears to be the effect of adding or is the horizontal distance traveled and  is the 
subtracting those numbers? height in feet. Use the TRACE feature of your 

calculator to determine the height of the object 
when it has traveled 100 feet away horizontally. 

55 . A suspension bridge can be modeled by the 
quadratic function  with 

 where  is the number of 
feet from the center and  is height in feet. 
Use the TRACE feature of your calculator to 
estimate how far from the center does the bridge 
have a height of 100 feet. 

Extensions 

For the following exercises, use the vertex of the graph of the quadratic function and the direction the graph opens to 
find the domain and range of the function. 
56 . Vertex  opens up. 57 . Vertex  opens down. 58 . Vertex  opens 

down. 
59 . Vertex  opens 

up. 

For the following exercises, write the equation of the quadratic function that contains the given point and has the same 
shape as the given function. 
60 . Contains  and has 61 . Contains  and has 62 . Contains  and has the 

shape of the shape of shape of 
Vertex is on the  axis. Vertex is on the  axis. Vertex is on the  axis. 

63 . Contains  and has 64 . Contains  and has the 65 . Contains  has the 
the shape of shape of shape of 
Vertex is on the  axis. Vertex is on the  axis. Vertex has x-coordinate of 

Real-World Applications 

66 . Find the dimensions of the 67 . Find the dimensions of the 68 . Find the dimensions of the 
rectangular dog park rectangular dog park split rectangular dog park 
producing the greatest into 2 pens of the same producing the greatest 
enclosed area given 200 size producing the greatest enclosed area split into 3 
feet of fencing. possible enclosed area sections of the same size 

given 300 feet of fencing. given 500 feet of fencing. 



408     5 • Polynomial and Rational Functions

69 . Among all of the pairs of 70 . Among all of the pairs of 71 . Suppose that the price per 
numbers whose sum is 6, numbers whose difference unit in dollars of a cell 
find the pair with the is 12, find the pair with the phone production is 
largest product. What is smallest product. What is modeled by 
the product? the product?  where 

 is in thousands of 
phones produced, and the 
revenue represented by 
thousands of dollars is 

 Find the 
production level that will 
maximize revenue. 

72 . A rocket is launched in the 73 . A ball is thrown in the air 74 . A soccer stadium holds 
air. Its height, in meters from the top of a building. 62,000 spectators. With a 
above sea level, as a Its height, in meters above ticket price of $11, the 
function of time, in seconds, ground, as a function of average attendance has 
is given by time, in seconds, is given been 26,000. When the 

by price dropped to $9, the 
Find the maximum height average attendance rose to 
the rocket attains. How long does it take to 31,000. Assuming that 

reach maximum height? attendance is linearly 
related to ticket price, what 
ticket price would 
maximize revenue? 

75 . A farmer finds that if she 
plants 75 trees per acre, 
each tree will yield 20 
bushels of fruit. She 
estimates that for each 
additional tree planted per 
acre, the yield of each tree 
will decrease by 3 bushels. 
How many trees should 
she plant per acre to 
maximize her harvest? 

5.2 Power Functions and Polynomial Functions 
Learning Objectives 
In this section, you will: 

Identify power functions. 
Identify end behavior of power functions. 
Identify polynomial functions. 
Identify the degree and leading coefficient of polynomial functions. 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.2 • Power Functions and Polynomial Functions     409

Figure 1 (credit: Jason Bay, Flickr) 
Suppose a certain species of bird thrives on a small island. Its population over the last few years is shown in Table 1. 

Year 

Bird Population 

Table 1 

The population can be estimated using the function  where  represents the bird 
population on the island  years after 2009. We can use this model to estimate the maximum bird population and when it 
will occur. We can also use this model to predict when the bird population will disappear from the island. In this section, 
we will examine functions that we can use to estimate and predict these types of changes. 

Identifying Power Functions 
Before we can understand the bird problem, it will be helpful to understand a different type of function. A power 
function is a function with a single term that is the product of a real number, a coefficient, and a variable raised to a 
fixed real number. 
As an example, consider functions for area or volume. The function for the area of a circle with radius  is 

and the function for the volume of a sphere with radius  is 

Both of these are examples of power functions because they consist of a coefficient,  or  multiplied by a variable 
raised to a power. 

Power Function 

A power function is a function that can be represented in the form 

where  and  are real numbers, and  is known as the coefficient. 

 Q&A Is  a power function? 

No. A power function contains a variable base raised to a fixed power. This function has a constant base 
raised to a variable power. This is called an exponential function, not a power function. 



410     5 • Polynomial and Rational Functions

EXAMPLE 1 

Identifying Power Functions 
Which of the following functions are power functions? 

Solution 
All of the listed functions are power functions. 

The constant and identity functions are power functions because they can be written as  and 
respectively. 

The quadratic and cubic functions are power functions with whole number powers  and 
The reciprocal and reciprocal squared functions are power functions with negative whole number powers because they 
can be written as  and 
The square and cube root functions are power functions with fractional powers because they can be written as 

 or 

 TRY IT #1 Which functions are power functions? 

Identifying End Behavior of Power Functions 
Figure 2 shows the graphs of  and  which are all power functions with even, positive 
integer powers. Notice that these graphs have similar shapes, very much like that of the quadratic function in the toolkit. 
However, as the power increases, the graphs flatten somewhat near the origin and become steeper away from the 
origin. 

Figure 2 Even-power functions 

To describe the behavior as numbers become larger and larger, we use the idea of infinity. We use the symbol ∞  for 
positive infinity and  for negative infinity. When we say that “  approaches infinity,” which can be symbolically 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.2 • Power Functions and Polynomial Functions     411

written as ∞  we are describing a behavior; we are saying that  is increasing without bound. 

With the positive even-power function, as the input increases or decreases without bound, the output values become 
very large, positive numbers. Equivalently, we could describe this behavior by saying that as  approaches positive or 
negative infinity, the  values increase without bound. In symbolic form, we could write 

∞ ∞
Figure 3 shows the graphs of  and  which are all power functions with odd, whole-
number powers. Notice that these graphs look similar to the cubic function in the toolkit. Again, as the power increases, 
the graphs flatten near the origin and become steeper away from the origin. 

Figure 3 Odd-power functions 
These examples illustrate that functions of the form  reveal symmetry of one kind or another. First, in Figure 2 
we see that even functions of the form  even, are symmetric about the  axis. In Figure 3 we see that odd 
functions of the form   odd, are symmetric about the origin. 
For these odd power functions, as  approaches negative infinity,  decreases without bound. As  approaches 
positive infinity,  increases without bound. In symbolic form we write 

∞ ∞
∞ ∞

The behavior of the graph of a function as the input values get very small ( ∞  ) and get very large ( ∞  ) is 
referred to as the end behavior of the function. We can use words or symbols to describe end behavior. 
Figure 4 shows the end behavior of power functions in the form  where  is a non-negative integer 
depending on the power and the constant. 



412     5 • Polynomial and Rational Functions

Figure 4 
...

HOW TO 

Given a power function  where  is a positive integer, identify the end behavior. 

1. Determine whether the power is even or odd. 
2. Determine whether the constant is positive or negative. 
3. Use Figure 4 to identify the end behavior. 

EXAMPLE 2 

Identifying the End Behavior of a Power Function 
Describe the end behavior of the graph of 

Solution 
The coefficient is 1 (positive) and the exponent of the power function is 8 (an even number). As  approaches infinity, the 
output (value of  ) increases without bound. We write as ∞ ∞  As  approaches negative infinity, the 
output increases without bound. In symbolic form, as ∞ ∞  We can graphically represent the function as 
shown in Figure 5. 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.2 • Power Functions and Polynomial Functions     413

Figure 5 

EXAMPLE 3 

Identifying the End Behavior of a Power Function. 
Describe the end behavior of the graph of 

Solution 
The exponent of the power function is 9 (an odd number). Because the coefficient is  (negative), the graph is the 
reflection about the  axis of the graph of  Figure 6 shows that as  approaches infinity, the output decreases 
without bound. As  approaches negative infinity, the output increases without bound. In symbolic form, we would write 

∞ ∞
∞ ∞

Figure 6 

Analysis 
We can check our work by using the table feature on a graphing utility. 



414     5 • Polynomial and Rational Functions

–10 1,000,000,000 

–5 1,953,125 

0 0 

5 –1,953,125 

10 –1,000,000,000 

Table 2 

We can see from Table 2 that, when we substitute very small values for  the output is very large, and when we 
substitute very large values for  the output is very small (meaning that it is a very large negative value). 

 TRY IT #2 Describe in words and symbols the end behavior of 

Identifying Polynomial Functions 
An oil pipeline bursts in the Gulf of Mexico, causing an oil slick in a roughly circular shape. The slick is currently 24 miles 
in radius, but that radius is increasing by 8 miles each week. We want to write a formula for the area covered by the oil 
slick by combining two functions. The radius  of the spill depends on the number of weeks  that have passed. This 
relationship is linear. 

We can combine this with the formula for the area  of a circle. 

Composing these functions gives a formula for the area in terms of weeks. 

Multiplying gives the formula. 

This formula is an example of a polynomial function. A polynomial function consists of either zero or the sum of a finite 
number of non-zero terms, each of which is a product of a number, called the coefficient of the term, and a variable 
raised to a non-negative integer power. 

Polynomial Functions 

Let  be a non-negative integer. A polynomial function is a function that can be written in the form 

This is called the general form of a polynomial function. Each  is a coefficient and can be any real number, but 
≠ . Each expression  is a term of a polynomial function. 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.2 • Power Functions and Polynomial Functions     415

EXAMPLE 4 

Identifying Polynomial Functions 
Which of the following are polynomial functions? 

Solution 
The first two functions are examples of polynomial functions because they can be written in the form 

 where the powers are non-negative integers and the coefficients are real 
numbers. 

•  can be written as 
•  can be written as 
•  cannot be written in this form and is therefore not a polynomial function. 

Identifying the Degree and Leading Coefficient of a Polynomial Function 
Because of the form of a polynomial function, we can see an infinite variety in the number of terms and the power of the 
variable. Although the order of the terms in the polynomial function is not important for performing operations, we 
typically arrange the terms in descending order of power, or in general form. The degree of the polynomial is the highest 
power of the variable that occurs in the polynomial; it is the power of the first variable if the function is in general form. 
The leading term is the term containing the highest power of the variable, or the term with the highest degree. The 
leading coefficient is the coefficient of the leading term. 

Terminology of Polynomial Functions 

We often rearrange polynomials so that the powers are descending. 

When a polynomial is written in this way, we say that it is in general form. 

...
HOW TO 

Given a polynomial function, identify the degree and leading coefficient. 

1. Find the highest power of  to determine the degree of the function. 
2. Identify the term containing the highest power of  to find the leading term. 
3. Identify the coefficient of the leading term. 

EXAMPLE 5 

Identifying the Degree and Leading Coefficient of a Polynomial Function 
Identify the degree, leading term, and leading coefficient of the following polynomial functions. 



416     5 • Polynomial and Rational Functions

Solution 
For the function  the highest power of  is 3, so the degree is 3. The leading term is the term containing that 
degree,  The leading coefficient is the coefficient of that term, 
For the function  the highest power of  is  so the degree is  The leading term is the term containing that degree, 

 The leading coefficient is the coefficient of that term, 
For the function  the highest power of  is  so the degree is  The leading term is the term containing that 
degree,  The leading coefficient is the coefficient of that term, 

 TRY IT #3 Identify the degree, leading term, and leading coefficient of the polynomial 

Identifying End Behavior of Polynomial Functions 
Knowing the degree of a polynomial function is useful in helping us predict its end behavior. To determine its end 
behavior, look at the leading term of the polynomial function. Because the power of the leading term is the highest, that 
term will grow significantly faster than the other terms as  gets very large or very small, so its behavior will dominate 
the graph. For any polynomial, the end behavior of the polynomial will match the end behavior of the power function 
consisting of the leading term. See Table 3. 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.2 • Power Functions and Polynomial Functions     417

Polynomial Function Leading Term Graph of Polynomial Function 

Table 3 



418     5 • Polynomial and Rational Functions

Polynomial Function Leading Term Graph of Polynomial Function 

Table 3 

EXAMPLE 6 

Identifying End Behavior and Degree of a Polynomial Function 
Describe the end behavior and determine a possible degree of the polynomial function in Figure 7. 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.2 • Power Functions and Polynomial Functions     419

Figure 7 

Solution 
As the input values  get very large, the output values  increase without bound. As the input values  get very small, 
the output values  decrease without bound. We can describe the end behavior symbolically by writing 

∞ ∞
∞ ∞

In words, we could say that as  values approach infinity, the function values approach infinity, and as  values approach 
negative infinity, the function values approach negative infinity. 
We can tell this graph has the shape of an odd degree power function that has not been reflected, so the degree of the 
polynomial creating this graph must be odd and the leading coefficient must be positive. 

 TRY IT #4 Describe the end behavior, and determine a possible degree of the polynomial function in Figure 
8. 

Figure 8 

EXAMPLE 7 

Identifying End Behavior and Degree of a Polynomial Function 
Given the function  express the function as a polynomial in general form, and determine the 



420     5 • Polynomial and Rational Functions

leading term, degree, and end behavior of the function. 

Solution 
Obtain the general form by expanding the given expression for 

The general form is  The leading term is  therefore, the degree of the polynomial is 4. 
The degree is even (4) and the leading coefficient is negative (–3), so the end behavior is 

∞ ∞
∞ ∞

 TRY IT #5 Given the function  express the function as a polynomial in 
general form and determine the leading term, degree, and end behavior of the function. 

Identifying Local Behavior of Polynomial Functions 
In addition to the end behavior of polynomial functions, we are also interested in what happens in the “middle” of the 
function. In particular, we are interested in locations where graph behavior changes. A turning point is a point at which 
the function values change from increasing to decreasing or decreasing to increasing. 
We are also interested in the intercepts. As with all functions, the y-intercept is the point at which the graph intersects 
the vertical axis. The point corresponds to the coordinate pair in which the input value is zero. Because a polynomial is a 
function, only one output value corresponds to each input value so there can be only one y-intercept  The 
x-intercepts occur at the input values that correspond to an output value of zero. It is possible to have more than one 
x-intercept. See Figure 9. 

Figure 9 

Intercepts and Turning Points of Polynomial Functions 

A turning point of a graph is a point at which the graph changes direction from increasing to decreasing or 
decreasing to increasing. The y-intercept is the point at which the function has an input value of zero. The x-intercepts 
are the points at which the output value is zero. 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.2 • Power Functions and Polynomial Functions     421

...
HOW TO 

Given a polynomial function, determine the intercepts. 

1. Determine the y-intercept by setting  and finding the corresponding output value. 
2. Determine the x-intercepts by solving for the input values that yield an output value of zero. 

EXAMPLE 8 

Determining the Intercepts of a Polynomial Function 
Given the polynomial function  written in factored form for your convenience, determine 
the y- and x-intercepts. 

Solution 
The y-intercept occurs when the input is zero so substitute 0 for 

The y-intercept is (0, 8). 
The x-intercepts occur when the output is zero. 

The x-intercepts are  and 
We can see these intercepts on the graph of the function shown in Figure 10. 

Figure 10 

EXAMPLE 9 

Determining the Intercepts of a Polynomial Function with Factoring 
Given the polynomial function  determine the y- and x-intercepts. 



422     5 • Polynomial and Rational Functions

Solution 
The y-intercept occurs when the input is zero. 

The y-intercept is 
The x-intercepts occur when the output is zero. To determine when the output is zero, we will need to factor the 
polynomial. 

The x-intercepts are  and 
We can see these intercepts on the graph of the function shown in Figure 11. We can see that the function is even 
because 

Figure 11 

 TRY IT #6 Given the polynomial function  determine the y- and x-intercepts. 

Comparing Smooth and Continuous Graphs 
The degree of a polynomial function helps us to determine the number of x-intercepts and the number of turning points. 
A polynomial function of  degree is the product of  factors, so it will have at most  roots or zeros, or x-intercepts. 
The graph of the polynomial function of degree  must have at most  turning points. This means the graph has at 
most one fewer turning point than the degree of the polynomial or one fewer than the number of factors. 
A continuous function has no breaks in its graph: the graph can be drawn without lifting the pen from the paper. A 
smooth curve is a graph that has no sharp corners. The turning points of a smooth graph must always occur at rounded 
curves. The graphs of polynomial functions are both continuous and smooth. 

Intercepts and Turning Points of Polynomials 

A polynomial of degree  will have, at most,  x-intercepts and  turning points. 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.2 • Power Functions and Polynomial Functions     423

EXAMPLE 10 

Determining the Number of Intercepts and Turning Points of a Polynomial 
Without graphing the function, determine the local behavior of the function by finding the maximum number of 
x-intercepts and turning points for 

Solution 
The polynomial has a degree of  so there are at most 10 x-intercepts and at most 9 turning points. 

 TRY IT #7 Without graphing the function, determine the maximum number of x-intercepts and turning 
points for 

EXAMPLE 11 

Drawing Conclusions about a Polynomial Function from the Graph 
What can we conclude about the polynomial represented by the graph shown in Figure 12 based on its intercepts and 
turning points? 

Figure 12 

Solution 
The end behavior of the graph tells us this is the graph of an even-degree polynomial. See Figure 13. 

Figure 13 
The graph has 2 x-intercepts, suggesting a degree of 2 or greater, and 3 turning points, suggesting a degree of 4 or 
greater. Based on this, it would be reasonable to conclude that the degree is even and at least 4. 



424     5 • Polynomial and Rational Functions

 TRY IT #8 What can we conclude about the polynomial represented by the graph shown in Figure 14 based 
on its intercepts and turning points? 

Figure 14 

EXAMPLE 12 

Drawing Conclusions about a Polynomial Function from the Factors 
Given the function  determine the local behavior. 

Solution 
The y-intercept is found by evaluating 

The y-intercept is 
The x-intercepts are found by determining the zeros of the function. 

The x-intercepts are  and 
The degree is 3 so the graph has at most 2 turning points. 

 TRY IT #9 Given the function  determine the local behavior. 

 MEDIA 

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with power and polynomial functions. 

Find Key Information about a Given Polynomial Function (https://openstax.org/l/keyinfopoly) 
End Behavior of a Polynomial Function (https://openstax.org/l/endbehavior) 
Turning Points and  intercepts of Polynomial Functions (https://openstax.org/l/turningpoints) 
Least Possible Degree of a Polynomial Function (https://openstax.org/l/leastposdegree) 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.2 • Power Functions and Polynomial Functions     425

 5.2 SECTION EXERCISES 
Verbal 

1 . Explain the difference  2 . If a polynomial function is in  3 . In general, explain the end 
between the coefficient of a factored form, what would behavior of a polynomial 
power function and its be a good first step in order with odd degree if the 
degree. to determine the degree of leading coefficient is 

the function? positive. 
4 . What is the relationship  5 . What can we conclude if, in 

between the degree of a general, the graph of a 
polynomial function and the polynomial function exhibits 
maximum number of the following end behavior? 
turning points in its graph? As ∞ ∞

and as 
∞ ∞

Algebraic 

For the following exercises, identify the function as a power function, a polynomial function, or neither. 

6 .  7 .  8 . 

9 .  10 .  11 . 

For the following exercises, find the degree and leading coefficient for the given polynomial. 

12 .  13 .  14 . 

15 .  16 . 

For the following exercises, determine the end behavior of the functions. 

17 .  18 .  19 . 

20 .  21 .  22 . 

23 .  24 . 

For the following exercises, find the intercepts of the functions. 

25 .  26 .  27 . 

28 .  29 .  30 . 



426     5 • Polynomial and Rational Functions

Graphical 

For the following exercises, determine the least possible degree of the polynomial function shown. 
31 . 32 . 33 . 

34 . 35 . 36 . 

37 . 38 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.2 • Power Functions and Polynomial Functions     427

For the following exercises, determine whether the graph of the function provided is a graph of a polynomial function. If 
so, determine the number of turning points and the least possible degree for the function. 
39 . 40 . 41 . 

42 . 43 . 44 . 

45 . 

Numeric 

For the following exercises, make a table to confirm the end behavior of the function. 

46 .  47 . 48 . 

49 . 50 . 

Technology 

For the following exercises, graph the polynomial functions using a calculator. Based on the graph, determine the 
intercepts and the end behavior. 

51 . 52 .  53 . 



428     5 • Polynomial and Rational Functions

54 .  55 . 56 . 

57 . 58 .  59 . 

60 . 

Extensions 

For the following exercises, use the information about the graph of a polynomial function to determine the function. 
Assume the leading coefficient is 1 or –1. There may be more than one correct answer. 
61 . The  intercept is  The  intercepts are 62 . The  intercept is  The  intercepts are 

,  Degree is 2. ,  Degree is 2. 
End behavior: as ∞ , ∞ ; as ∞ , End behavior: as ∞ , ∞ , as 

∞ ∞ , ∞
63 . The  intercept is  The  intercepts are 64 . The  intercept is  The  intercept is 

,  Degree is 3. Degree is 3. 
End behavior: as ∞ , ∞ , as End behavior: as ∞ , ∞ , as ∞ , 

∞ , ∞ ∞
65 . The  intercept is  There is no  intercept. 

Degree is 4. 
End behavior: as ∞ , ∞ , as ∞ , 

∞

Real-World Applications 

For the following exercises, use the written statements to construct a polynomial function that represents the required 
information. 
66 . An oil slick is expanding as  67 . A cube has an edge of 3  68 . A rectangle has a length of 

a circle. The radius of the feet. The edge is increasing 10 inches and a width of 6 
circle is increasing at the at the rate of 2 feet per inches. If the length is 
rate of 20 meters per day. minute. Express the increased by  inches and 
Express the area of the volume of the cube as a the width increased by 
circle as a function of  the function of  the number twice that amount, express 
number of days elapsed. of minutes elapsed. the area of the rectangle as 

a function of 
69 . An open box is to be  70 . A rectangle is twice as long 

constructed by cutting out as it is wide. Squares of 
square corners of  inch side 2 feet are cut out from 
sides from a piece of each corner. Then the sides 
cardboard 8 inches by 8 are folded up to make an 
inches and then folding up open box. Express the 
the sides. Express the volume of the box as a 
volume of the box as a function of the width (  ). 
function of 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.3 • Graphs of Polynomial Functions     429

5.3 Graphs of Polynomial Functions 
Learning Objectives 
In this section, you will: 

Recognize characteristics of graphs of polynomial functions. 
Use factoring to find zeros of polynomial functions. 
Identify zeros and their multiplicities. 
Determine end behavior. 
Understand the relationship between degree and turning points. 
Graph polynomial functions. 
Use the Intermediate Value Theorem. 

The revenue in millions of dollars for a fictional cable company from 2006 through 2013 is shown in Table 1. 

Year 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 

Revenues 52.4 52.8 51.2 49.5 48.6 48.6 48.7 47.1 

Table 1 

The revenue can be modeled by the polynomial function 

where  represents the revenue in millions of dollars and  represents the year, with  corresponding to 2006. Over 
which intervals is the revenue for the company increasing? Over which intervals is the revenue for the company 
decreasing? These questions, along with many others, can be answered by examining the graph of the polynomial 
function. We have already explored the local behavior of quadratics, a special case of polynomials. In this section we will 
explore the local behavior of polynomials in general. 

Recognizing Characteristics of Graphs of Polynomial Functions 
Polynomial functions of degree 2 or more have graphs that do not have sharp corners; recall that these types of graphs 
are called smooth curves. Polynomial functions also display graphs that have no breaks. Curves with no breaks are called 
continuous. Figure 1 shows a graph that represents a polynomial function and a graph that represents a function that is 
not a polynomial. 

Figure 1 

EXAMPLE 1 

Recognizing Polynomial Functions 
Which of the graphs in Figure 2 represents a polynomial function? 



430     5 • Polynomial and Rational Functions

Figure 2 

Solution 
The graphs of  and  are graphs of polynomial functions. They are smooth and continuous. 
The graphs of  and  are graphs of functions that are not polynomials. The graph of function  has a sharp corner. The 
graph of function  is not continuous. 

 Q&A Do all polynomial functions have as their domain all real numbers? 

Yes. Any real number is a valid input for a polynomial function. 

Using Factoring to Find Zeros of Polynomial Functions 
Recall that if  is a polynomial function, the values of  for which  are called zeros of  If the equation of the 
polynomial function can be factored, we can set each factor equal to zero and solve for the zeros. 
We can use this method to find  intercepts because at the  intercepts we find the input values when the output value 
is zero. For general polynomials, this can be a challenging prospect. While quadratics can be solved using the relatively 
simple quadratic formula, the corresponding formulas for cubic and fourth-degree polynomials are not simple enough 
to remember, and formulas do not exist for general higher-degree polynomials. Consequently, we will limit ourselves to 
three cases: 
1. The polynomial can be factored using known methods: greatest common factor and trinomial factoring. 
2. The polynomial is given in factored form. 
3. Technology is used to determine the intercepts. 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.3 • Graphs of Polynomial Functions     431

...
HOW TO 

Given a polynomial function  find the x-intercepts by factoring. 

1. Set 
2. If the polynomial function is not given in factored form: 
a. Factor out any common monomial factors. 
b. Factor any factorable binomials or trinomials. 

3. Set each factor equal to zero and solve to find the  intercepts. 

EXAMPLE 2 

Finding the x-Intercepts of a Polynomial Function by Factoring 
Find the x-intercepts of 

Solution 
We can attempt to factor this polynomial to find solutions for 

This gives us five x-intercepts:  and  See Figure 3. We can see that this is an even 
function because it is symmetric about the y-axis. 

Figure 3 



432     5 • Polynomial and Rational Functions

EXAMPLE 3 

Finding the x-Intercepts of a Polynomial Function by Factoring 
Find the x-intercepts of 

Solution 
Find solutions for  by factoring. 

There are three x-intercepts:  and  See Figure 4. 

Figure 4 

EXAMPLE 4 

Finding the y- and x-Intercepts of a Polynomial in Factored Form 
Find the y- and x-intercepts of 

Solution 
The y-intercept can be found by evaluating 

So the y-intercept is 
The x-intercepts can be found by solving 

So the x-intercepts are  and 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.3 • Graphs of Polynomial Functions     433

Analysis 
We can always check that our answers are reasonable by using a graphing calculator to graph the polynomial as shown 
in Figure 5. 

Figure 5 

EXAMPLE 5 

Finding the x-Intercepts of a Polynomial Function Using a Graph 
Find the x-intercepts of 

Solution 
This polynomial is not in factored form, has no common factors, and does not appear to be factorable using techniques 
previously discussed. Fortunately, we can use technology to find the intercepts. Keep in mind that some values make 
graphing difficult by hand. In these cases, we can take advantage of graphing utilities. 
Looking at the graph of this function, as shown in Figure 6, it appears that there are x-intercepts at  and 

Figure 6 
We can check whether these are correct by substituting these values for  and verifying that 



434     5 • Polynomial and Rational Functions

Since  we have: 

Each x-intercept corresponds to a zero of the polynomial function and each zero yields a factor, so we can now write the 
polynomial in factored form. 

 TRY IT #1 Find the y- and x-intercepts of the function 

Identifying Zeros and Their Multiplicities 
Graphs behave differently at various x-intercepts. Sometimes, the graph will cross over the horizontal axis at an 
intercept. Other times, the graph will touch the horizontal axis and "bounce" off. 
Suppose, for example, we graph the function shown. 

Notice in Figure 7 that the behavior of the function at each of the x-intercepts is different. 

Figure 7 Identifying the behavior of the graph at an x-intercept by examining the multiplicity of the zero. 
The x-intercept  is the solution of equation  The graph passes directly through the x-intercept at 

 The factor is linear (has a degree of 1), so the behavior near the intercept is like that of a line—it passes directly 
through the intercept. We call this a single zero because the zero corresponds to a single factor of the function. 

The x-intercept  is the repeated solution of equation  The graph touches the axis at the intercept and 
changes direction. The factor is quadratic (degree 2), so the behavior near the intercept is like that of a quadratic—it 
bounces off of the horizontal axis at the intercept. 

The factor is repeated, that is, the factor  appears twice. The number of times a given factor appears in the 
factored form of the equation of a polynomial is called the multiplicity. The zero associated with this factor,  has 
multiplicity 2 because the factor  occurs twice. 

The x-intercept  is the repeated solution of factor  The graph passes through the axis at the 
intercept, but flattens out a bit first. This factor is cubic (degree 3), so the behavior near the intercept is like that of a 
cubic—with the same S-shape near the intercept as the toolkit function  We call this a triple zero, or a zero 
with multiplicity 3. 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.3 • Graphs of Polynomial Functions     435

For zeros with even multiplicities, the graphs touch or are tangent to the x-axis. For zeros with odd multiplicities, the 
graphs cross or intersect the x-axis. See Figure 8 for examples of graphs of polynomial functions with multiplicity 1, 2, 
and 3. 

Figure 8 
For higher even powers, such as 4, 6, and 8, the graph will still touch and bounce off of the horizontal axis but, for each 
increasing even power, the graph will appear flatter as it approaches and leaves the x-axis. 
For higher odd powers, such as 5, 7, and 9, the graph will still cross through the horizontal axis, but for each increasing 
odd power, the graph will appear flatter as it approaches and leaves the x-axis. 

Graphical Behavior of Polynomials at x-Intercepts 

If a polynomial contains a factor of the form  the behavior near the  intercept  is determined by the power 
 We say that  is a zero of multiplicity 

The graph of a polynomial function will touch the x-axis at zeros with even multiplicities. The graph will cross the 
x-axis at zeros with odd multiplicities. 

The sum of the multiplicities is the degree of the polynomial function. 

...
HOW TO 

Given a graph of a polynomial function of degree  identify the zeros and their multiplicities. 

1. If the graph crosses the x-axis and appears almost linear at the intercept, it is a single zero. 
2. If the graph touches the x-axis and bounces off of the axis, it is a zero with even multiplicity. 
3. If the graph crosses the x-axis at a zero, it is a zero with odd multiplicity. 
4. The sum of the multiplicities is 

EXAMPLE 6 

Identifying Zeros and Their Multiplicities 
Use the graph of the function of degree 6 in Figure 9 to identify the zeros of the function and their possible multiplicities. 



436     5 • Polynomial and Rational Functions

Figure 9 

Solution 
The polynomial function is of degree 6. The sum of the multiplicities must be 6. 
Starting from the left, the first zero occurs at  The graph touches the x-axis, so the multiplicity of the zero must 
be even. The zero of  most likely has multiplicity 
The next zero occurs at  The graph looks almost linear at this point. This is a single zero of multiplicity 1. 
The last zero occurs at  The graph crosses the x-axis, so the multiplicity of the zero must be odd. We know that the 
multiplicity is likely 3 and that the sum of the multiplicities is 6. 

 TRY IT #2 Use the graph of the function of degree 9 in Figure 10 to identify the zeros of the function and 
their multiplicities. 

Figure 10 

Determining End Behavior 
As we have already learned, the behavior of a graph of a polynomial function of the form 

will either ultimately rise or fall as  increases without bound and will either rise or fall as  decreases without bound. 
This is because for very large inputs, say 100 or 1,000, the leading term dominates the size of the output. The same is 
true for very small inputs, say –100 or –1,000. 
Recall that we call this behavior the end behavior of a function. As we pointed out when discussing quadratic equations, 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.3 • Graphs of Polynomial Functions     437

when the leading term of a polynomial function,  is an even power function, as  increases or decreases without 
bound,  increases without bound. When the leading term is an odd power function, as  decreases without bound, 

 also decreases without bound; as  increases without bound,  also increases without bound. If the leading 
term is negative, it will change the direction of the end behavior. Figure 11 summarizes all four cases. 

Figure 11 

Understanding the Relationship between Degree and Turning Points 
In addition to the end behavior, recall that we can analyze a polynomial function’s local behavior. It may have a turning 
point where the graph changes from increasing to decreasing (rising to falling) or decreasing to increasing (falling to 
rising). Look at the graph of the polynomial function  in Figure 12. The graph has three 
turning points. 



438     5 • Polynomial and Rational Functions

Figure 12 
This function  is a 4th degree polynomial function and has 3 turning points. The maximum number of turning points of 
a polynomial function is always one less than the degree of the function. 

Interpreting Turning Points 

A turning point is a point of the graph where the graph changes from increasing to decreasing (rising to falling) or 
decreasing to increasing (falling to rising). 

A polynomial of degree  will have at most  turning points. 

EXAMPLE 7 

Finding the Maximum Number of Turning Points Using the Degree of a Polynomial Function 
Find the maximum number of turning points of each polynomial function. 

ⓐ   ⓑ  
Solution 

ⓐ 
First, rewrite the polynomial function in descending order: 
Identify the degree of the polynomial function. This polynomial function is of degree 5. 
The maximum number of turning points is 

ⓑ 
First, identify the leading term of the polynomial function if the function were expanded. 

Then, identify the degree of the polynomial function. This polynomial function is of degree 4. 
The maximum number of turning points is 

Graphing Polynomial Functions 
We can use what we have learned about multiplicities, end behavior, and turning points to sketch graphs of polynomial 
functions. Let us put this all together and look at the steps required to graph polynomial functions. 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.3 • Graphs of Polynomial Functions     439

...
HOW TO 

Given a polynomial function, sketch the graph. 

1. Find the intercepts. 
2. Check for symmetry. If the function is an even function, its graph is symmetrical about the  axis, that is, 

 If a function is an odd function, its graph is symmetrical about the origin, that is, 

3. Use the multiplicities of the zeros to determine the behavior of the polynomial at the  intercepts. 
4. Determine the end behavior by examining the leading term. 
5. Use the end behavior and the behavior at the intercepts to sketch a graph. 
6. Ensure that the number of turning points does not exceed one less than the degree of the polynomial. 
7. Optionally, use technology to check the graph. 

EXAMPLE 8 

Sketching the Graph of a Polynomial Function 
Sketch a graph of 

Solution 
This graph has two x-intercepts. At  the factor is squared, indicating a multiplicity of 2. The graph will bounce at 
this x-intercept. At  the function has a multiplicity of one, indicating the graph will cross through the axis at this 
intercept. 
The y-intercept is found by evaluating 

The y-intercept is 

Additionally, we can see the leading term, if this polynomial were multiplied out, would be  so the end behavior is 
that of a vertically reflected cubic, with the outputs decreasing as the inputs approach infinity, and the outputs 
increasing as the inputs approach negative infinity. See Figure 13. 

Figure 13 
To sketch this, we consider that: 

• As ∞  the function ∞  so we know the graph starts in the second quadrant and is decreasing toward 
the  axis. 



440     5 • Polynomial and Rational Functions

• Since  is not equal to  the graph does not display symmetry. 
• At  the graph bounces off of the x-axis, so the function must start increasing. 

At  the graph crosses the y-axis at the y-intercept. See Figure 14. 

Figure 14 
Somewhere after this point, the graph must turn back down or start decreasing toward the horizontal axis because the 
graph passes through the next intercept at  See Figure 15. 

Figure 15 

As ∞  the function  so we know the graph continues to decrease, and we can stop drawing the graph in 
the fourth quadrant. 
Using technology, we can create the graph for the polynomial function, shown in Figure 16, and verify that the resulting 
graph looks like our sketch in Figure 15. 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.3 • Graphs of Polynomial Functions     441

Figure 16 The complete graph of the polynomial function 

 TRY IT #3 Sketch a graph of 

Using the Intermediate Value Theorem 
In some situations, we may know two points on a graph but not the zeros. If those two points are on opposite sides of 
the x-axis, we can confirm that there is a zero between them. Consider a polynomial function  whose graph is smooth 
and continuous. The Intermediate Value Theorem states that for two numbers  and  in the domain of  if  and 

 then the function  takes on every value between  and  (While the theorem is intuitive, the proof 
is actually quite complicated and requires higher mathematics.) We can apply this theorem to a special case that is useful 
in graphing polynomial functions. If a point on the graph of a continuous function  at  lies above the  axis and 
another point at  lies below the  axis, there must exist a third point between  and  where the graph 
crosses the  axis. Call this point  This means that we are assured there is a solution  where 
In other words, the Intermediate Value Theorem tells us that when a polynomial function changes from a negative value 
to a positive value, the function must cross the  axis. Figure 17 shows that there is a zero between  and 

Figure 17 Using the Intermediate Value Theorem to show there exists a zero. 

Intermediate Value Theorem 

Let  be a polynomial function. The Intermediate Value Theorem states that if  and  have opposite signs, 
then there exists at least one value  between  and  for which 



442     5 • Polynomial and Rational Functions

EXAMPLE 9 

Using the Intermediate Value Theorem 
Show that the function  has at least two real zeros between  and 

Solution 
As a start, evaluate  at the integer values  and  See Table 2. 

1 2 3 4 

5 0 –3 2 

Table 2 

We see that one zero occurs at  Also, since  is negative and  is positive, by the Intermediate Value 
Theorem, there must be at least one real zero between 3 and 4. 
We have shown that there are at least two real zeros between  and 

Analysis 
We can also see on the graph of the function in Figure 18 that there are two real zeros between  and 

Figure 18 

 TRY IT #4 Show that the function  has at least one real zero between  and 

Writing Formulas for Polynomial Functions 
Now that we know how to find zeros of polynomial functions, we can use them to write formulas based on graphs. 
Because a polynomial function written in factored form will have an x-intercept where each factor is equal to zero, we 
can form a function that will pass through a set of x-intercepts by introducing a corresponding set of factors. 

Factored Form of Polynomials 

If a polynomial of degree  that can be factored into strictly linear factors has horizontal intercepts at 
 then the polynomial can be written in the factored form: 

 where the powers  on each factor can be determined by the behavior 
of the graph at the corresponding intercept, and the stretch factor  can be determined given a value of the function 
other than the x-intercept. 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.3 • Graphs of Polynomial Functions     443

...
HOW TO 

Given a graph of a polynomial function, write a formula for the function. 

1. Identify the x-intercepts of the graph to find the factors of the polynomial. 
2. Examine the behavior of the graph at the x-intercepts to determine the multiplicity of each factor. 
3. Find the polynomial of least degree containing all the factors found in the previous step. 
4. Use any other point on the graph (the y-intercept may be easiest) to determine the stretch factor. 

EXAMPLE 10 

Writing a Formula for a Polynomial Function from the Graph 
Write a formula for the polynomial function shown in Figure 19. 

Figure 19 

Solution 
This graph has three x-intercepts:  and  The y-intercept is located at  At  and  the graph 
passes through the axis linearly, suggesting the corresponding factors of the polynomial will be linear. At  the 
graph bounces at the intercept, suggesting the corresponding factor of the polynomial will be second degree 
(quadratic). Together, this gives us 

To determine the stretch factor, we utilize another point on the graph. We will use the  intercept  to solve for 

The graphed polynomial appears to represent the function 

 TRY IT #5 Given the graph shown in Figure 20, write a formula for the function shown. 



444     5 • Polynomial and Rational Functions

Figure 20 

Using Local and Global Extrema 
With quadratics, we were able to algebraically find the maximum or minimum value of the function by finding the vertex. 
For general polynomials, finding these turning points is not possible without more advanced techniques from calculus. 
Even then, finding where extrema occur can still be algebraically challenging. For now, we will estimate the locations of 
turning points using technology to generate a graph. 
Each turning point represents a local minimum or maximum. Sometimes, a turning point is the highest or lowest point 
on the entire graph. In these cases, we say that the turning point is a global maximum or a global minimum. These are 
also referred to as the absolute maximum and absolute minimum values of the function. 

Local and Global Extrema 

A local maximum or local minimum at  (sometimes called the relative maximum or minimum, respectively) is the 
output at the highest or lowest point on the graph in an open interval around  If a function has a local 
maximum at  then  for all  in an open interval around  If a function has a local minimum at 
then  for all  in an open interval around 

A global maximum or global minimum is the output at the highest or lowest point of the function. If a function has 
a global maximum at  then  for all  If a function has a global minimum at  then  for all 

We can see the difference between local and global extrema in Figure 21. 

Figure 21 

 Q&A Do all polynomial functions have a global minimum or maximum? 

No. Only polynomial functions of even degree have a global minimum or maximum. For example, 
 has neither a global maximum nor a global minimum. 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.3 • Graphs of Polynomial Functions     445

EXAMPLE 11 

Using Local Extrema to Solve Applications 
An open-top box is to be constructed by cutting out squares from each corner of a 14 cm by 20 cm sheet of plastic and 
then folding up the sides. Find the size of squares that should be cut out to maximize the volume enclosed by the box. 

Solution 
We will start this problem by drawing a picture like that in Figure 22, labeling the width of the cut-out squares with a 
variable, 

Figure 22 
Notice that after a square is cut out from each end, it leaves a  cm by  cm rectangle for the base of 
the box, and the box will be  cm tall. This gives the volume 

Notice, since the factors are   and  the three zeros are 10, 7, and 0, respectively. Because a height of 0 
cm is not reasonable, we consider the only the zeros 10 and 7. The shortest side is 14 and we are cutting off two squares, 
so values  may take on are greater than zero or less than 7. This means we will restrict the domain of this function to 

 Using technology to sketch the graph of  on this reasonable domain, we get a graph like that in Figure 
23. We can use this graph to estimate the maximum value for the volume, restricted to values for  that are reasonable 
for this problem—values from 0 to 7. 

Figure 23 
From this graph, we turn our focus to only the portion on the reasonable domain,  We can estimate the 
maximum value to be around 340 cubic cm, which occurs when the squares are about 2.75 cm on each side. To improve 
this estimate, we could use advanced features of our technology, if available, or simply change our window to zoom in 
on our graph to produce Figure 24. 



446     5 • Polynomial and Rational Functions

Figure 24 
From this zoomed-in view, we can refine our estimate for the maximum volume to about 339 cubic cm, when the 
squares measure approximately 2.7 cm on each side. 

 TRY IT #6 Use technology to find the maximum and minimum values on the interval  of the function 

 MEDIA 

Access the following online resource for additional instruction and practice with graphing polynomial functions. 

Intermediate Value Theorem (https://openstax.org/l/ivt) 

 5.3 SECTION EXERCISES 
Verbal 

1 . What is the difference  2 . If a polynomial function of  3 . Explain how the 
between an  intercept and degree  has  distinct Intermediate Value 
a zero of a polynomial zeros, what do you know Theorem can assist us in 
function about the graph of the finding a zero of a function. 

function? 
4 . Explain how the factored  5 . If the graph of a polynomial 

form of the polynomial just touches the x-axis and 
helps us in graphing it. then changes direction, 

what can we conclude about 
the factored form of the 
polynomial? 

Algebraic 

For the following exercises, find the  or t-intercepts of the polynomial functions. 

6 .  7 .  8 . 

9 .  10 .  11 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.3 • Graphs of Polynomial Functions     447

12 .  13 .  14 . 

15 .  16 .  17 . 

18 .  19 .  20 . 

21 .  22 .  23 . 

For the following exercises, use the Intermediate Value Theorem to confirm that the given polynomial has at least one 
zero within the given interval. 

24 .  between  25 .  between  26 .  between 
 and  and  and 

27 .  between  28 .  between  29 . 
 and  .  and between  and 

For the following exercises, find the zeros and give the multiplicity of each. 

30 .  31 .  32 . 

33 .  34 .  35 . 

36 .  37 . 

38 .  39 .  40 . 

41 . 

Graphical 

For the following exercises, graph the polynomial functions. Note  and  intercepts, multiplicity, and end behavior. 

42 .  43 . 44 . 

45 . 46 .  47 . 

For the following exercises, use the graphs to write the formula for a polynomial function of least degree. 
48 . 49 . 50 . 



448     5 • Polynomial and Rational Functions

51 . 52 . 

For the following exercises, use the graph to identify zeros and multiplicity. 
53 . 54 . 55 . 

56 . 

For the following exercises, use the given information about the polynomial graph to write the equation. 
57 . Degree 3. Zeros at  58 . Degree 3. Zeros at  59 . Degree 5. Roots of 

 and  and multiplicity 2 at  and 
y-intercept at y-intercept at  , and a root of 

multiplicity 1 at 
y-intercept at 

60 . Degree 4. Root of  61 . Degree 5. Double zero at  62 . Degree 3. Zeros at 
multiplicity 2 at  and  and triple zero at  and 
a roots of multiplicity 1 at  Passes through the y-intercept at 

 and point 
y-intercept at 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.3 • Graphs of Polynomial Functions     449

63 . Degree 3. Zeros at  64 . Degree 5. Roots of  65 . Degree 4. Roots of 
 and multiplicity 2 at multiplicity 2 at  and 

y-intercept at and  and a root of roots of multiplicity 1 at 
multiplicity 1 at  and 
y-intercept at y-intercept at 

66 . Double zero at  and 
triple zero at  Passes 
through the point 

Technology 

For the following exercises, use a calculator to approximate local minima and maxima or the global minimum and 
maximum. 

67 .  68 .  69 . 

70 .  71 . 

Extensions 

For the following exercises, use the graphs to write a polynomial function of least degree. 
72 . 73 . 74 . 

Real-World Applications 

For the following exercises, write the polynomial function that models the given situation. 
75 . A rectangle has a length of  76 . Consider the same  77 . A square has sides of 12 

10 units and a width of 8 rectangle of the preceding units. Squares  by 
units. Squares of  by problem. Squares of  by  units are cut out of 
units are cut out of each  units are cut out of each each corner, and then the 
corner, and then the sides corner. Express the volume sides are folded up to 
are folded up to create an of the box as a polynomial create an open box. 
open box. Express the in terms of Express the volume of the 
volume of the box as a box as a function in terms 
polynomial function in of 
terms of 



450     5 • Polynomial and Rational Functions

78 . A cylinder has a radius of  79 . A right circular cone has a 
 units and a height of radius of  and a 

3 units greater. Express the height 3 units less. Express 
volume of the cylinder as a the volume of the cone as 
polynomial function. a polynomial function. The 

volume of a cone is 
 for radius 

and height 

5.4 Dividing Polynomials 
Learning Objectives 
In this section, you will: 

Use long division to divide polynomials. 
Use synthetic division to divide polynomials. 

Figure 1 Lincoln Memorial, Washington, D.C. (credit: Ron Cogswell, Flickr) 
The exterior of the Lincoln Memorial in Washington, D.C., is a large rectangular solid with length 61.5 meters (m), width 
40 m, and height 30 m.1  We can easily find the volume using elementary geometry. 

So the volume is 73,800 cubic meters  Suppose we knew the volume, length, and width. We could divide to find the 
height. 

As we can confirm from the dimensions above, the height is 30 m. We can use similar methods to find any of the missing 
dimensions. We can also use the same method if any, or all, of the measurements contain variable expressions. For 
example, suppose the volume of a rectangular solid is given by the polynomial  The length of 
the solid is given by  the width is given by  To find the height of the solid, we can use polynomial division, which 
is the focus of this section. 

Using Long Division to Divide Polynomials 
We are familiar with the long division algorithm for ordinary arithmetic. We begin by dividing into the digits of the 
dividend that have the greatest place value. We divide, multiply, subtract, include the digit in the next place value 
position, and repeat. For example, let’s divide 178 by 3 using long division. 

1 National Park Service. "Lincoln Memorial Building Statistics." http://www.nps.gov/linc/historyculture/lincoln-memorial-building-statistics.htm. 
Accessed 4/3/2014 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.4 • Dividing Polynomials     451

Another way to look at the solution is as a sum of parts. This should look familiar, since it is the same method used to 
check division in elementary arithmetic. 

We call this the Division Algorithm and will discuss it more formally after looking at an example. 
Division of polynomials that contain more than one term has similarities to long division of whole numbers. We can write 
a polynomial dividend as the product of the divisor and the quotient added to the remainder. The terms of the 
polynomial division correspond to the digits (and place values) of the whole number division. This method allows us to 
divide two polynomials. For example, if we were to divide  by  using the long division algorithm, 
it would look like this: 

We have found 

or 

We can identify the dividend, the divisor, the quotient, and the remainder. 



452     5 • Polynomial and Rational Functions

Writing the result in this manner illustrates the Division Algorithm. 

The Division Algorithm 

The Division Algorithm states that, given a polynomial dividend  and a non-zero polynomial divisor  where 
the degree of  is less than or equal to the degree of  , there exist unique polynomials  and  such that 

 is the quotient and  is the remainder. The remainder is either equal to zero or has degree strictly less than 

If  then  divides evenly into  This means that, in this case, both  and  are factors of 

...
HOW TO 

Given a polynomial and a binomial, use long division to divide the polynomial by the binomial. 

1. Set up the division problem. 
2. Determine the first term of the quotient by dividing the leading term of the dividend by the leading term of the 

divisor. 
3. Multiply the answer by the divisor and write it below the like terms of the dividend. 
4. Subtract the bottom binomial from the top binomial. 
5. Bring down the next term of the dividend. 
6. Repeat steps 2–5 until reaching the last term of the dividend. 
7. If the remainder is non-zero, express as a fraction using the divisor as the denominator. 

EXAMPLE 1 

Using Long Division to Divide a Second-Degree Polynomial 
Divide  by 

Solution 

The quotient is  The remainder is 0. We write the result as 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.4 • Dividing Polynomials     453

or 

Analysis 
This division problem had a remainder of 0. This tells us that the dividend is divided evenly by the divisor, and that the 
divisor is a factor of the dividend. 

EXAMPLE 2 

Using Long Division to Divide a Third-Degree Polynomial 
Divide  by 

Solution 

There is a remainder of 1. We can express the result as: 

Analysis 
We can check our work by using the Division Algorithm to rewrite the solution. Then multiply. 

Notice, as we write our result, 

• the dividend is 
• the divisor is 
• the quotient is 
• the remainder is 

 TRY IT #1 Divide  by 

Using Synthetic Division to Divide Polynomials 
As we’ve seen, long division of polynomials can involve many steps and be quite cumbersome. Synthetic division is a 
shorthand method of dividing polynomials for the special case of dividing by a linear factor whose leading coefficient is 
1. 
To illustrate the process, recall the example at the beginning of the section. 

Divide  by  using the long division algorithm. 
The final form of the process looked like this: 



454     5 • Polynomial and Rational Functions

There is a lot of repetition in the table. If we don’t write the variables but, instead, line up their coefficients in columns 
under the division sign and also eliminate the partial products, we already have a simpler version of the entire problem. 

Synthetic division carries this simplification even a few more steps. Collapse the table by moving each of the rows up to 
fill any vacant spots. Also, instead of dividing by 2, as we would in division of whole numbers, then multiplying and 
subtracting the middle product, we change the sign of the “divisor” to –2, multiply and add. The process starts by 
bringing down the leading coefficient. 

We then multiply it by the “divisor” and add, repeating this process column by column, until there are no entries left. The 
bottom row represents the coefficients of the quotient; the last entry of the bottom row is the remainder. In this case, the 
quotient is  and the remainder is  The process will be made more clear in Example 3. 

Synthetic Division 

Synthetic division is a shortcut that can be used when the divisor is a binomial in the form  where  is a real 
number. In synthetic division, only the coefficients are used in the division process. 

...
HOW TO 

Given two polynomials, use synthetic division to divide. 

1. Write  for the divisor. 
2. Write the coefficients of the dividend. 
3. Bring the lead coefficient down. 
4. Multiply the lead coefficient by  Write the product in the next column. 
5. Add the terms of the second column. 
6. Multiply the result by  Write the product in the next column. 
7. Repeat steps 5 and 6 for the remaining columns. 
8. Use the bottom numbers to write the quotient. The number in the last column is the remainder. The next number 

from the right has degree 0, the next number has degree 1, and so on. 

EXAMPLE 3 

Using Synthetic Division to Divide a Second-Degree Polynomial 
Use synthetic division to divide  by 

Solution 
Begin by setting up the synthetic division. Write  and the coefficients. 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.4 • Dividing Polynomials     455

Bring down the lead coefficient. Multiply the lead coefficient by 

Continue by adding the numbers in the second column. Multiply the resulting number by  Write the result in the next 
column. Then add the numbers in the third column. 

The result is  The remainder is 0. So  is a factor of the original polynomial. 

Analysis 
Just as with long division, we can check our work by multiplying the quotient by the divisor and adding the remainder. 

EXAMPLE 4 

Using Synthetic Division to Divide a Third-Degree Polynomial 
Use synthetic division to divide  by 

Solution 
The binomial divisor is  so  Add each column, multiply the result by –2, and repeat until the last column is 
reached. 

The result is  The remainder is 0. Thus,  is a factor of 

Analysis 
The graph of the polynomial function  in Figure 2 shows a zero at  This 
confirms that  is a factor of 



456     5 • Polynomial and Rational Functions

Figure 2 

EXAMPLE 5 

Using Synthetic Division to Divide a Fourth-Degree Polynomial 
Use synthetic division to divide  by 

Solution 
Notice there is no x-term. We will use a zero as the coefficient for that term. 

The result is 

 TRY IT #2 Use synthetic division to divide  by 

Using Polynomial Division to Solve Application Problems 
Polynomial division can be used to solve a variety of application problems involving expressions for area and volume. We 
looked at an application at the beginning of this section. Now we will solve that problem in the following example. 

EXAMPLE 6 

Using Polynomial Division in an Application Problem 
The volume of a rectangular solid is given by the polynomial  The length of the solid is given by 

 and the width is given by  Find the height,  of the solid. 

Solution 
There are a few ways to approach this problem. We need to divide the expression for the volume of the solid by the 
expressions for the length and width. Let us create a sketch as in Figure 3. 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.4 • Dividing Polynomials     457

Figure 3 
We can now write an equation by substituting the known values into the formula for the volume of a rectangular solid. 

To solve for  first divide both sides by 

Now solve for  using synthetic division. 

The quotient is  and the remainder is 0. The height of the solid is 

 TRY IT #3 The area of a rectangle is given by  The width of the rectangle is given by 
 Find an expression for the length of the rectangle. 

 MEDIA 

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with polynomial division. 

Dividing a Trinomial by a Binomial Using Long Division (https://openstax.org/l/dividetribild) 
Dividing a Polynomial by a Binomial Using Long Division (https://openstax.org/l/dividepolybild) 
Ex 2: Dividing a Polynomial by a Binomial Using Synthetic Division (https://openstax.org/l/dividepolybisd2) 
Ex 4: Dividing a Polynomial by a Binomial Using Synthetic Division (https://openstax.org/l/dividepolybisd4) 

 5.4 SECTION EXERCISES 
Verbal 

1 . If division of a polynomial by a binomial results in a  2 . If a polynomial of degree  is divided by a binomial 
remainder of zero, what can be conclude? of degree 1, what is the degree of the quotient? 

Algebraic 

For the following exercises, use long division to divide. Specify the quotient and the remainder. 

3 .  4 .  5 . 

6 .  7 .  8 . 

9 .  10 .  11 . 

12 .  13 . 



458     5 • Polynomial and Rational Functions

For the following exercises, use synthetic division to find the quotient. Ensure the equation is in the form required by 
synthetic division. (Hint: divide the dividend and divisor by the coefficient of the linear term in the divisor.) 

14 .  15 .  16 . 

17 .  18 . 

19 .  20 .  21 . 

22 .  23 .  24 . 

25 .  26 . 

27 .  28 . 

29 .  30 . 

31 .  32 . 

33 .  34 . 

35 .  36 . 

37 . 

For the following exercises, use synthetic division to determine whether the first expression is a factor of the second. If it 
is, indicate the factorization. 

38 .  39 .  40 . 

41 .  42 .  43 . 

Graphical 

For the following exercises, use the graph of the third-degree polynomial and one factor to write the factored form of the 
polynomial suggested by the graph. The leading coefficient is one. 

44 . Factor is 45 . Factor is 46 . Factor is 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.4 • Dividing Polynomials     459

47 . Factor is 48 . Factor is 

For the following exercises, use synthetic division to find the quotient and remainder. 

49 .  50 .  51 . 

52 .  53 . 

Technology 

For the following exercises, use a calculator with CAS to answer the questions. 

54 . Consider  with  What do you  55 . Consider  for  What do you 
expect the result to be if expect the result to be if 

56 . Consider  for  What do you  57 . Consider  with  What do you 
expect the result to be if expect the result to be if 

58 . Consider  with  What do you 
expect the result to be if 

Extensions 

For the following exercises, use synthetic division to determine the quotient involving a complex number. 

59 .  60 .  61 . 

62 .  63 . 

Real-World Applications 

For the following exercises, use the given length and area of a rectangle to express the width algebraically. 
64 . Length is  area is  65 . Length is  area is  66 . Length is  area is 

For the following exercises, use the given volume of a box and its length and width to express the height of the box 
algebraically. 

67 . Volume is  length is  68 . Volume is  length is 
 width is  width is 

69 . Volume is  length is  70 . Volume is  length is 
width is width is 



460     5 • Polynomial and Rational Functions

For the following exercises, use the given volume and radius of a cylinder to express the height of the cylinder 
algebraically. 

71 . Volume is  radius is  72 . Volume is  radius is 

73 . Volume is 
radius is 

5.5 Zeros of Polynomial Functions 
Learning Objectives 
In this section, you will: 

Evaluate a polynomial using the Remainder Theorem. 
Use the Factor Theorem to solve a polynomial equation. 
Use the Rational Zero Theorem to find rational zeros. 
Find zeros of a polynomial function. 
Use the Linear Factorization Theorem to find polynomials with given zeros. 
Use Descartes’ Rule of Signs. 
Solve real-world applications of polynomial equations 

A new bakery offers decorated, multi-tiered cakes for display and cutting at Quinceañera and wedding celebrations, as 
well as sheet cakes to serve most of the guests. The bakery wants the volume of a small sheet cake to be 351 cubic 
inches. The cake is in the shape of a rectangular solid. They want the length of the cake to be four inches longer than the 
width of the cake and the height of the cake to be one-third of the width. What should the dimensions of the cake pan 
be? 
This problem can be solved by writing a cubic function and solving a cubic equation for the volume of the cake. In this 
section, we will discuss a variety of tools for writing polynomial functions and solving polynomial equations. 

Evaluating a Polynomial Using the Remainder Theorem 
In the last section, we learned how to divide polynomials. We can now use polynomial division to evaluate polynomials 
using the Remainder Theorem. If the polynomial is divided by  the remainder may be found quickly by evaluating 
the polynomial function at  that is,  Let’s walk through the proof of the theorem. 
Recall that the Division Algorithm states that, given a polynomial dividend  and a non-zero polynomial divisor , 
there exist unique polynomials  and  such that 

and either  or the degree of  is less than the degree of . In practice divisors,  will have degrees less 
than or equal to the degree of . If the divisor,  is  this takes the form 

Since the divisor  is linear, the remainder will be a constant,  And, if we evaluate this for  we have 

In other words,  is the remainder obtained by dividing  by 

The Remainder Theorem 

If a polynomial  is divided by  then the remainder is the value 

...
HOW TO 

Given a polynomial function  evaluate  at  using the Remainder Theorem. 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.5 • Zeros of Polynomial Functions     461

1. Use synthetic division to divide the polynomial by 
2. The remainder is the value 

EXAMPLE 1 

Using the Remainder Theorem to Evaluate a Polynomial 
Use the Remainder Theorem to evaluate  at 

Solution 
To find the remainder using the Remainder Theorem, use synthetic division to divide the polynomial by 

The remainder is 25. Therefore, 

Analysis 
We can check our answer by evaluating 

 TRY IT #1 Use the Remainder Theorem to evaluate  at 

Using the Factor Theorem to Solve a Polynomial Equation 
The Factor Theorem is another theorem that helps us analyze polynomial equations. It tells us how the zeros of a 
polynomial are related to the factors. Recall that the Division Algorithm. 

If  is a zero, then the remainder  is  and  or 
Notice, written in this form,  is a factor of  We can conclude if  is a zero of  then  is a factor of 
Similarly, if  is a factor of  then the remainder of the Division Algorithm  is 0. This tells 
us that  is a zero. 
This pair of implications is the Factor Theorem. As we will soon see, a polynomial of degree  in the complex number 
system will have  zeros. We can use the Factor Theorem to completely factor a polynomial into the product of  factors. 
Once the polynomial has been completely factored, we can easily determine the zeros of the polynomial. 

The Factor Theorem 

According to the Factor Theorem,  is a zero of  if and only if  is a factor of 

...
HOW TO 

Given a factor and a third-degree polynomial, use the Factor Theorem to factor the polynomial. 

1. Use synthetic division to divide the polynomial by 
2. Confirm that the remainder is 0. 
3. Write the polynomial as the product of  and the quadratic quotient. 
4. If possible, factor the quadratic. 



462     5 • Polynomial and Rational Functions

5. Write the polynomial as the product of factors. 

EXAMPLE 2 

Using the Factor Theorem to Find the Zeros of a Polynomial Expression 
Show that  is a factor of  Find the remaining factors. Use the factors to determine the zeros of 
the polynomial. 

Solution 
We can use synthetic division to show that  is a factor of the polynomial. 

The remainder is zero, so  is a factor of the polynomial. We can use the Division Algorithm to write the polynomial 
as the product of the divisor and the quotient: 

We can factor the quadratic factor to write the polynomial as 

By the Factor Theorem, the zeros of  are –2, 3, and 5. 

 TRY IT #2 Use the Factor Theorem to find the zeros of  given that  is a 
factor of the polynomial. 

Using the Rational Zero Theorem to Find Rational Zeros 
Another use for the Remainder Theorem is to test whether a rational number is a zero for a given polynomial. But first 
we need a pool of rational numbers to test. The Rational Zero Theorem helps us to narrow down the number of 
possible rational zeros using the ratio of the factors of the constant term and factors of the leading coefficient of the 
polynomial 

Consider a quadratic function with two zeros,  and  By the Factor Theorem, these zeros have factors 
associated with them. Let us set each factor equal to 0, and then construct the original quadratic function absent its 
stretching factor. 

Notice that two of the factors of the constant term, 6, are the two numerators from the original rational roots: 2 and 3. 
Similarly, two of the factors from the leading coefficient, 20, are the two denominators from the original rational roots: 5 
and 4. 
We can infer that the numerators of the rational roots will always be factors of the constant term and the denominators 
will be factors of the leading coefficient. This is the essence of the Rational Zero Theorem; it is a means to give us a pool 
of possible rational zeros. 

The Rational Zero Theorem 

The Rational Zero Theorem states that, if the polynomial  has integer 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.5 • Zeros of Polynomial Functions     463

coefficients , then every rational zero of  has the form  where  is a factor of the constant term  and 
is a factor of the leading coefficient 

When the leading coefficient is 1, the possible rational zeros are the factors of the constant term. 

...
HOW TO 

Given a polynomial function  use the Rational Zero Theorem to find rational zeros. 

1. Determine all factors of the constant term and all factors of the leading coefficient. 
2. Determine all possible values of  where  is a factor of the constant term and  is a factor of the leading 

coefficient. Be sure to include both positive and negative candidates. 
3. Determine which possible zeros are actual zeros by evaluating each case of 

EXAMPLE 3 

Listing All Possible Rational Zeros 
List all possible rational zeros of 

Solution 
The only possible rational zeros of  are the quotients of the factors of the last term, –4, and the factors of the leading 
coefficient, 2. 
The constant term is –4; the factors of –4 are 
The leading coefficient is 2; the factors of 2 are 
If any of the four real zeros are rational zeros, then they will be of one of the following factors of –4 divided by one of the 
factors of 2. 

Note that  and  which have already been listed. So we can shorten our list. 

EXAMPLE 4 

Using the Rational Zero Theorem to Find Rational Zeros 
Use the Rational Zero Theorem to find the rational zeros of 

Solution 
The Rational Zero Theorem tells us that if  is a zero of  then  is a factor of 1 and  is a factor of 2. 

The factors of 1 are  and the factors of 2 are  and  The possible values for  are  and  These are the 
possible rational zeros for the function. We can determine which of the possible zeros are actual zeros by substituting 
these values for  in 



464     5 • Polynomial and Rational Functions

Of those,  are not zeros of  1 is the only rational zero of 

 TRY IT #3 Use the Rational Zero Theorem to find the rational zeros of 

Finding the Zeros of Polynomial Functions 
The Rational Zero Theorem helps us to narrow down the list of possible rational zeros for a polynomial function. Once we 
have done this, we can use synthetic division repeatedly to determine all of the zeros of a polynomial function. 

...
HOW TO 

Given a polynomial function  use synthetic division to find its zeros. 

1. Use the Rational Zero Theorem to list all possible rational zeros of the function. 
2. Use synthetic division to evaluate a given possible zero by synthetically dividing the candidate into the 

polynomial. If the remainder is 0, the candidate is a zero. If the remainder is not zero, discard the candidate. 
3. Repeat step two using the quotient found with synthetic division. If possible, continue until the quotient is a 

quadratic. 
4. Find the zeros of the quadratic function. Two possible methods for solving quadratics are factoring and using the 

quadratic formula. 

EXAMPLE 5 

Finding the Zeros of a Polynomial Function with Repeated Real Zeros 
Find the zeros of 

Solution 
The Rational Zero Theorem tells us that if  is a zero of  then  is a factor of –1 and  is a factor of 4. 

The factors of  are  and the factors of  are  and  The possible values for  are  and  These 
are the possible rational zeros for the function. We will use synthetic division to evaluate each possible zero until we find 
one that gives a remainder of 0. Let’s begin with 1. 

Dividing by  gives a remainder of 0, so 1 is a zero of the function. The polynomial can be written as 

The quadratic is a perfect square.  can be written as 

We already know that 1 is a zero. The other zero will have a multiplicity of 2 because the factor is squared. To find the 
other zero, we can set the factor equal to 0. 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.5 • Zeros of Polynomial Functions     465

The zeros of the function are 1 and  with multiplicity 2. 

Analysis 
Look at the graph of the function  in Figure 1. Notice, at  the graph bounces off the x-axis, indicating the even 
multiplicity (2,4,6…) for the zero  At  the graph crosses the x-axis, indicating the odd multiplicity (1,3,5…) for 
the zero 

Figure 1 

Using the Fundamental Theorem of Algebra 
Now that we can find rational zeros for a polynomial function, we will look at a theorem that discusses the number of 
complex zeros of a polynomial function. The Fundamental Theorem of Algebra tells us that every polynomial function 
has at least one complex zero. This theorem forms the foundation for solving polynomial equations. 
Suppose  is a polynomial function of degree four, and  The Fundamental Theorem of Algebra states that there 
is at least one complex solution, call it  By the Factor Theorem, we can write  as a product of  and a 
polynomial quotient. Since  is linear, the polynomial quotient will be of degree three. Now we apply the 
Fundamental Theorem of Algebra to the third-degree polynomial quotient. It will have at least one complex zero, call it 

 So we can write the polynomial quotient as a product of  and a new polynomial quotient of degree two. 
Continue to apply the Fundamental Theorem of Algebra until all of the zeros are found. There will be four of them and 
each one will yield a factor of 

The Fundamental Theorem of Algebra 

The Fundamental Theorem of Algebra states that, if  is a polynomial of degree n > 0, then  has at least one 
complex zero. 

We can use this theorem to argue that, if  is a polynomial of degree  and  is a non-zero real number, then 
 has exactly  linear factors 

where  are complex numbers. Therefore,  has  roots if we allow for multiplicities. 

 Q&A Does every polynomial have at least one imaginary zero? 

No. Real numbers are a subset of complex numbers, but not the other way around. A complex number 
is not necessarily imaginary. Real numbers are also complex numbers. 



466     5 • Polynomial and Rational Functions

EXAMPLE 6 

Finding the Zeros of a Polynomial Function with Complex Zeros 
Find the zeros of 

Solution 
The Rational Zero Theorem tells us that if  is a zero of  then  is a factor of 3 and  is a factor of 3. 

The factors of 3 are  and  The possible values for  and therefore the possible rational zeros for the function, are 
 We will use synthetic division to evaluate each possible zero until we find one that gives a remainder of 

0. Let’s begin with –3. 

Dividing by  gives a remainder of 0, so –3 is a zero of the function. The polynomial can be written as 

We can then set the quadratic equal to 0 and solve to find the other zeros of the function. 

The zeros of  are –3 and 

Analysis 
Look at the graph of the function  in Figure 2. Notice that, at  the graph crosses the x-axis, indicating an odd 
multiplicity (1) for the zero  Also note the presence of the two turning points. This means that, since there is a 3rd 

degree polynomial, we are looking at the maximum number of turning points. So, the end behavior of increasing 
without bound to the right and decreasing without bound to the left will continue. Thus, all the x-intercepts for the 
function are shown. So either the multiplicity of  is 1 and there are two complex solutions, which is what we 
found, or the multiplicity at  is three. Either way, our result is correct. 

Figure 2 

 TRY IT #4 Find the zeros of 

Using the Linear Factorization Theorem to Find Polynomials with Given Zeros 
A vital implication of the Fundamental Theorem of Algebra, as we stated above, is that a polynomial function of degree 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.5 • Zeros of Polynomial Functions     467

will have  zeros in the set of complex numbers, if we allow for multiplicities. This means that we can factor the 
polynomial function into  factors. The Linear Factorization Theorem tells us that a polynomial function will have the 
same number of factors as its degree, and that each factor will be in the form  where  is a complex number. 
Let  be a polynomial function with real coefficients, and suppose  is a zero of  Then, by the Factor 
Theorem,  is a factor of  For  to have real coefficients,  must also be a factor of  This is 
true because any factor other than  when multiplied by  will leave imaginary components in the 
product. Only multiplication with conjugate pairs will eliminate the imaginary parts and result in real coefficients. In 
other words, if a polynomial function  with real coefficients has a complex zero  then the complex conjugate 

 must also be a zero of  This is called the Complex Conjugate Theorem. 

Complex Conjugate Theorem 

According to the Linear Factorization Theorem, a polynomial function will have the same number of factors as its 
degree, and each factor will be in the form  , where  is a complex number. 

If the polynomial function  has real coefficients and a complex zero in the form  then the complex conjugate 
of the zero,  is also a zero. 

...
HOW TO 

Given the zeros of a polynomial function  and a point (c, f(c)) on the graph of  use the Linear Factorization 
Theorem to find the polynomial function. 

1. Use the zeros to construct the linear factors of the polynomial. 
2. Multiply the linear factors to expand the polynomial. 
3. Substitute  into the function to determine the leading coefficient. 
4. Simplify. 

EXAMPLE 7 

Using the Linear Factorization Theorem to Find a Polynomial with Given Zeros 
Find a fourth degree polynomial with real coefficients that has zeros of –3, 2,  such that 

Solution 
Because  is a zero, by the Complex Conjugate Theorem  is also a zero. The polynomial must have factors of 

 and  Since we are looking for a degree 4 polynomial, and now have four zeros, we have 
all four factors. Let’s begin by multiplying these factors. 

We need to find a to ensure  Substitute  and  into 

So the polynomial function is 

or 



468     5 • Polynomial and Rational Functions

Analysis 
We found that both  and  were zeros, but only one of these zeros needed to be given. If  is a zero of a polynomial 
with real coefficients, then  must also be a zero of the polynomial because  is the complex conjugate of 

 Q&A If  were given as a zero of a polynomial with real coefficients, would  also need to be a 
zero? 

Yes. When any complex number with an imaginary component is given as a zero of a polynomial with 
real coefficients, the conjugate must also be a zero of the polynomial. 

 TRY IT #5 Find a third degree polynomial with real coefficients that has zeros of 5 and  such that 

Using Descartes’ Rule of Signs 
There is a straightforward way to determine the possible numbers of positive and negative real zeros for any polynomial 
function. If the polynomial is written in descending order, Descartes’ Rule of Signs tells us of a relationship between the 
number of sign changes in  and the number of positive real zeros. For example, the polynomial function below has 
one sign change. 

This tells us that the function must have 1 positive real zero. 
There is a similar relationship between the number of sign changes in  and the number of negative real zeros. 

In this case,  has 3 sign changes. This tells us that  could have 3 or 1 negative real zeros. 

Descartes’ Rule of Signs 

According to Descartes’ Rule of Signs, if we let  be a polynomial function 
with real coefficients: 

• The number of positive real zeros is either equal to the number of sign changes of  or is less than the 
number of sign changes by an even integer. 

• The number of negative real zeros is either equal to the number of sign changes of  or is less than the 
number of sign changes by an even integer. 

EXAMPLE 8 

Using Descartes’ Rule of Signs 
Use Descartes’ Rule of Signs to determine the possible numbers of positive and negative real zeros for 

Solution 
Begin by determining the number of sign changes. 

Figure 3 
There are two sign changes, so there are either 2 or 0 positive real roots. Next, we examine  to determine the 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.5 • Zeros of Polynomial Functions     469

number of negative real roots. 

Figure 4 
Again, there are two sign changes, so there are either 2 or 0 negative real roots. 
There are four possibilities, as we can see in Table 1. 

Positive Real Zeros Negative Real Zeros Complex Zeros Total Zeros 

2 2 0 4 

2 0 2 4 

0 2 2 4 

0 0 4 4 

Table 1 

Analysis 
We can confirm the numbers of positive and negative real roots by examining a graph of the function. See Figure 5. We 
can see from the graph that the function has 0 positive real roots and 2 negative real roots. 

Figure 5 

 TRY IT #6 Use Descartes’ Rule of Signs to determine the maximum possible numbers of positive and 
negative real zeros for  Use a graph to verify the numbers 
of positive and negative real zeros for the function. 

Solving Real-World Applications 
We have now introduced a variety of tools for solving polynomial equations. Let’s use these tools to solve the bakery 
problem from the beginning of the section. 

EXAMPLE 9 

Solving Polynomial Equations 
A new bakery offers decorated, multi-tiered cakes for display and cutting at Quinceañera and wedding celebrations, as 



470     5 • Polynomial and Rational Functions

well as sheet cakes to serve most of the guests. The bakery wants the volume of a small sheet cake to be 351 cubic 
inches. The cake is in the shape of a rectangular solid. They want the length of the cake to be four inches longer than the 
width of the cake and the height of the cake to be one-third of the width. What should the dimensions of the cake pan 
be? 

Solution 
Begin by writing an equation for the volume of the cake. The volume of a rectangular solid is given by  We were 
given that the length must be four inches longer than the width, so we can express the length of the cake as 
We were given that the height of the cake is one-third of the width, so we can express the height of the cake as 
Let’s write the volume of the cake in terms of width of the cake. 

Substitute the given volume into this equation. 

Descartes' rule of signs tells us there is one positive solution. The Rational Zero Theorem tells us that the possible 
rational zeros are  and  We can use synthetic division to 
test these possible zeros. Only positive numbers make sense as dimensions for a cake, so we need not test any negative 
values. Let’s begin by testing values that make the most sense as dimensions for a small sheet cake. Use synthetic 
division to check 

Since 1 is not a solution, we will check 

Since 3 is not a solution either, we will test 

Synthetic division gives a remainder of 0, so 9 is a solution to the equation. We can use the relationships between the 
width and the other dimensions to determine the length and height of the sheet cake pan. 

The sheet cake pan should have dimensions 13 inches by 9 inches by 3 inches. 

 TRY IT #7 A shipping container in the shape of a rectangular solid must have a volume of 84 cubic meters. 
The client tells the manufacturer that, because of the contents, the length of the container must 
be one meter longer than the width, and the height must be one meter greater than twice the 
width. What should the dimensions of the container be? 

 MEDIA 

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with zeros of polynomial functions. 

Real Zeros, Factors, and Graphs of Polynomial Functions (https://openstax.org/l/realzeros) 
Complex Factorization Theorem (https://openstax.org/l/factortheorem) 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.5 • Zeros of Polynomial Functions     471

Find the Zeros of a Polynomial Function (https://openstax.org/l/findthezeros) 
Find the Zeros of a Polynomial Function 2 (https://openstax.org/l/findthezeros2) 
Find the Zeros of a Polynomial Function 3 (https://openstax.org/l/findthezeros3) 

 5.5 SECTION EXERCISES 
Verbal 

1 . Describe a use for the  2 . Explain why the Rational  3 . What is the difference 
Remainder Theorem. Zero Theorem does not between rational and real 

guarantee finding zeros of a zeros? 
polynomial function. 

4 . If Descartes’ Rule of Signs  5 . If synthetic division reveals a 
reveals a no change of signs zero, why should we try that 
or one sign of changes, value again as a possible 
what specific conclusion can solution? 
be drawn? 

Algebraic 

For the following exercises, use the Remainder Theorem to find the remainder. 

6 .  7 .  8 . 

9 .  10 . 

11 .  12 . 

13 . 

For the following exercises, use the given factor and the Factor Theorem to find all real zeros for the given polynomial 
function. 

14 .  15 . 

16 .  17 . 

18 .  19 . 

20 .  21 . ​

For the following exercises, use the Rational Zero Theorem to find the real solution(s) to each equation. 

22 .  23 .  24 . 

25 .  26 .  27 . 

28 .  29 .  30 . 

31 .  32 .  33 . 

34 . 35 .  36 . 

37 .  38 .  39 . 

For the following exercises, find all complex solutions (real and non-real). 

40 .  41 .  42 . 

43 .  44 . 45 . 



472     5 • Polynomial and Rational Functions

Graphical 

For the following exercises, use Descartes’ Rule to determine the possible number of positive and negative solutions. 
Confirm with the given graph. 

46 .  47 . 48 . 

49 . 50 .  51 . 

52 .  53 . 

54 .  55 . 

Numeric 

For the following exercises, list all possible rational zeros for the functions. 

56 .  57 .  58 . 

59 .  60 . 

Technology 

For the following exercises, use your calculator to graph the polynomial function. Based on the graph, find the rational 
zeros. All real solutions are rational. 

61 .  62 .  63 . 

64 .  65 . 

Extensions 

For the following exercises, construct a polynomial function of least degree possible using the given information. 

66 . Real roots: –1, 1, 3 and  67 . Real roots: –1, 1 (with  68 . Real roots: –2,  (with 
multiplicity 2 and 1) and multiplicity 2) and 

69 . Real roots:  , 0,  and  70 . Real roots: –4, –1, 1, 4 and 

Real-World Applications 

For the following exercises, find the dimensions of the box described. 
71 . The length is twice as long  72 . The length, width, and  73 . The length is one inch 

as the width. The height is height are consecutive more than the width, which 
2 inches greater than the whole numbers. The is one inch more than the 
width. The volume is 192 volume is 120 cubic inches. height. The volume is 
cubic inches. 86.625 cubic inches. 

74 . The length is three times  75 . The length is 3 inches more 
the height and the height than the width. The width 
is one inch less than the is 2 inches more than the 
width. The volume is 108 height. The volume is 120 
cubic inches. cubic inches. 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.6 • Rational Functions     473

For the following exercises, find the dimensions of the right circular cylinder described. 
76 . The radius is 3 inches more  77 . The height is one less than  78 . The radius and height 

than the height. The one half the radius. The differ by one meter. The 
volume is  cubic volume is  cubic radius is larger and the 
meters. meters. volume is  cubic 

meters. 

79 . The radius and height  80 . The radius is  meter 
differ by two meters. The greater than the height. 
height is greater and the The volume is  cubic 
volume is  cubic meters. 
meters. 

5.6 Rational Functions 
Learning Objectives 
In this section, you will: 

Use arrow notation. 
Solve applied problems involving rational functions. 
Find the domains of rational functions. 
Identify vertical asymptotes. 
Identify horizontal asymptotes. 
Graph rational functions. 

Suppose we know that the cost of making a product is dependent on the number of items,  produced. This is given by 
the equation  If we want to know the average cost for producing  items, we would 
divide the cost function by the number of items, 
The average cost function, which yields the average cost per item for  items produced, is 

Many other application problems require finding an average value in a similar way, giving us variables in the 
denominator. Written without a variable in the denominator, this function will contain a negative integer power. 
In the last few sections, we have worked with polynomial functions, which are functions with non-negative integers for 
exponents. In this section, we explore rational functions, which have variables in the denominator. 

Using Arrow Notation 
We have seen the graphs of the basic reciprocal function and the squared reciprocal function from our study of toolkit 
functions. Examine these graphs, as shown in Figure 1, and notice some of their features. 



474     5 • Polynomial and Rational Functions

Figure 1 

Several things are apparent if we examine the graph of 

1. On the left branch of the graph, the curve approaches the x-axis ∞
2. As the graph approaches  from the left, the curve drops, but as we approach zero from the right, the curve 

rises. 
3. Finally, on the right branch of the graph, the curves approaches the x-axis ∞

To summarize, we use arrow notation to show that  or  is approaching a particular value. See Table 1. 

Symbol Meaning 

 approaches  from the left (  but close to  ) 

 approaches  from the right (  but close to  ) 

∞  approaches infinity (  increases without bound) 

∞  approaches negative infinity (  decreases without bound) 

∞ the output approaches infinity (the output increases without bound) 

∞ the output approaches negative infinity (the output decreases without bound) 

the output approaches 

Table 1 

Local Behavior of 
Let’s begin by looking at the reciprocal function,  We cannot divide by zero, which means the function is 
undefined at  so zero is not in the domain. As the input values approach zero from the left side (becoming very 
small, negative values), the function values decrease without bound (in other words, they approach negative infinity). We 
can see this behavior in Table 2. 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.6 • Rational Functions     475

–0.1 –0.01 –0.001 –0.0001 

–10 –100 –1000 –10,000 

Table 2 

We write in arrow notation 

∞
As the input values approach zero from the right side (becoming very small, positive values), the function values increase 
without bound (approaching infinity). We can see this behavior in Table 3. 

0.1 0.01 0.001 0.0001 

10 100 1000 10,000 

Table 3 

We write in arrow notation 

∞
See Figure 2. 

Figure 2 
This behavior creates a vertical asymptote, which is a vertical line that the graph approaches but never crosses. In this 
case, the graph is approaching the vertical line  as the input becomes close to zero. See Figure 3. 



476     5 • Polynomial and Rational Functions

Figure 3 

Vertical Asymptote 

A vertical asymptote of a graph is a vertical line  where the graph tends toward positive or negative infinity as 
the input approaches  from either the left or the right. We write 

∞ ∞

End Behavior of 
As the values of  approach infinity, the function values approach 0. As the values of  approach negative infinity, the 
function values approach 0. See Figure 4. Symbolically, using arrow notation 

∞ ∞

Figure 4 
Based on this overall behavior and the graph, we can see that the function approaches 0 but never actually reaches 0; it 
seems to level off as the inputs become large. This behavior creates a horizontal asymptote, a horizontal line that the 
graph approaches as the input increases or decreases without bound. In this case, the graph is approaching the 
horizontal line  See Figure 5. 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.6 • Rational Functions     477

Figure 5 

Horizontal Asymptote 

A horizontal asymptote of a graph is a horizontal line  where the graph approaches the line as the inputs 
increase or decrease without bound. We write 

∞ ∞

EXAMPLE 1 

Using Arrow Notation 
Use arrow notation to describe the end behavior and local behavior of the function graphed in Figure 6. 

Figure 6 

Solution 
Notice that the graph is showing a vertical asymptote at  which tells us that the function is undefined at 

∞ ∞
And as the inputs decrease without bound, the graph appears to be leveling off at output values of 4, indicating a 
horizontal asymptote at  As the inputs increase without bound, the graph levels off at 4. 

∞ ∞



478     5 • Polynomial and Rational Functions

 TRY IT #1 Use arrow notation to describe the end behavior and local behavior for the reciprocal squared 
function. 

EXAMPLE 2 

Using Transformations to Graph a Rational Function 
Sketch a graph of the reciprocal function shifted two units to the left and up three units. Identify the horizontal and 
vertical asymptotes of the graph, if any. 

Solution 
Shifting the graph left 2 and up 3 would result in the function 

or equivalently, by giving the terms a common denominator, 

The graph of the shifted function is displayed in Figure 7. 

Figure 7 
Notice that this function is undefined at  and the graph also is showing a vertical asymptote at 

∞ ∞
As the inputs increase and decrease without bound, the graph appears to be leveling off at output values of 3, indicating 
a horizontal asymptote at 

∞
Analysis 

Notice that horizontal and vertical asymptotes are shifted left 2 and up 3 along with the function. 

 TRY IT #2 Sketch the graph, and find the horizontal and vertical asymptotes of the reciprocal squared 
function that has been shifted right 3 units and down 4 units. 

Solving Applied Problems Involving Rational Functions 
In Example 2, we shifted a toolkit function in a way that resulted in the function  This is an example of a 
rational function. A rational function is a function that can be written as the quotient of two polynomial functions. Many 
real-world problems require us to find the ratio of two polynomial functions. Problems involving rates and 
concentrations often involve rational functions. 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.6 • Rational Functions     479

Rational Function 

A rational function is a function that can be written as the quotient of two polynomial functions 

EXAMPLE 3 

Solving an Applied Problem Involving a Rational Function 
After running out of pre-packaged supplies, a nurse in a refugee camp is preparing an intravenous sugar solution for 
patients in the camp hospital. A large mixing tank currently contains 100 gallons of distilled water into which 5 pounds of 
sugar have been mixed. A tap will open pouring 10 gallons per minute of distilled water into the tank at the same time 
sugar is poured into the tank at a rate of 1 pound per minute. Find the ratio of sugar to water, in pounds per gallon in the 
tank after 12 minutes. Is that a greater ratio of sugar to water, in pounds per gallon than at the beginning? 

Solution 
Let  be the number of minutes since the tap opened. Since the water increases at 10 gallons per minute, and the sugar 
increases at 1 pound per minute, these are constant rates of change. This tells us the amount of water in the tank is 
changing linearly, as is the amount of sugar in the tank. We can write an equation independently for each: 

The ratio of sugar to water, in pounds per gallon,  , will be the ratio of pounds of sugar to gallons of water 

The ratio of sugar to water, in pounds per gallon after 12 minutes is given by evaluating  at 

This means the ratio of sugar to water, in pounds per gallon is 17 pounds of sugar to 220 gallons of water. 
At the beginning, the ratio of sugar to water, in pounds per gallon is 

Since  the ratio of sugar to water, in pounds per gallon is greater after 12 minutes than at the 
beginning. 

 TRY IT #3 There are 1,200 first-year and 1,500 second-year students at a rally at noon. After 12 p.m., 20 first-
year students arrive at the rally every five minutes while 15 second-year students leave the rally. 
Find the ratio of first-year to second-year students at 1 p.m. 

Finding the Domains of Rational Functions 
A vertical asymptote represents a value at which a rational function is undefined, so that value is not in the domain of 
the function. A reciprocal function cannot have values in its domain that cause the denominator to equal zero. In 
general, to find the domain of a rational function, we need to determine which inputs would cause division by zero. 

Domain of a Rational Function 

The domain of a rational function includes all real numbers except those that cause the denominator to equal zero. 



480     5 • Polynomial and Rational Functions

...
HOW TO 

Given a rational function, find the domain. 

1. Set the denominator equal to zero. 
2. Solve to find the x-values that cause the denominator to equal zero. 
3. The domain is all real numbers except those found in Step 2. 

EXAMPLE 4 

Finding the Domain of a Rational Function 
Find the domain of 

Solution 
Begin by setting the denominator equal to zero and solving. 

The denominator is equal to zero when  The domain of the function is all real numbers except 

Analysis 
A graph of this function, as shown in Figure 8, confirms that the function is not defined when 

Figure 8 
There is a vertical asymptote at  and a hole in the graph at  We will discuss these types of holes in greater 
detail later in this section. 

 TRY IT #4 Find the domain of 

Identifying Vertical Asymptotes of Rational Functions 
By looking at the graph of a rational function, we can investigate its local behavior and easily see whether there are 
asymptotes. We may even be able to approximate their location. Even without the graph, however, we can still determine 
whether a given rational function has any asymptotes, and calculate their location. 

Vertical Asymptotes 
The vertical asymptotes of a rational function may be found by examining the factors of the denominator that are not 
common to the factors in the numerator. Vertical asymptotes occur at the zeros of such factors. 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.6 • Rational Functions     481

...
HOW TO 

Given a rational function, identify any vertical asymptotes of its graph. 

1. Factor the numerator and denominator. 
2. Note any restrictions in the domain of the function. 
3. Reduce the expression by canceling common factors in the numerator and the denominator. 
4. Note any values that cause the denominator to be zero in this simplified version. These are where the vertical 

asymptotes occur. 
5. Note any restrictions in the domain where asymptotes do not occur. These are removable discontinuities, or 

“holes.” 

EXAMPLE 5 

Identifying Vertical Asymptotes 
Find the vertical asymptotes of the graph of 

Solution 
First, factor the numerator and denominator. 

To find the vertical asymptotes, we determine where this function will be undefined by setting the denominator equal to 
zero: 

Neither  nor  are zeros of the numerator, so the two values indicate two vertical asymptotes. The graph in 
Figure 9 confirms the location of the two vertical asymptotes. 

Figure 9 

Removable Discontinuities 
Occasionally, a graph will contain a hole: a single point where the graph is not defined, indicated by an open circle. We 
call such a hole a removable discontinuity. 

For example, the function  may be re-written by factoring the numerator and the denominator. 



482     5 • Polynomial and Rational Functions

Notice that  is a common factor to the numerator and the denominator. The zero of this factor,  is the 
location of the removable discontinuity. Notice also that  is not a factor in both the numerator and denominator. The 
zero of this factor,  is the vertical asymptote. See Figure 10. [Note that removable discontinuities may not be visible 
when we use a graphing calculator, depending upon the window selected.] 

Figure 10 

Removable Discontinuities of Rational Functions 

A removable discontinuity occurs in the graph of a rational function at  if  is a zero for a factor in the 
denominator that is common with a factor in the numerator. We factor the numerator and denominator and check for 
common factors. If we find any, we set the common factor equal to 0 and solve. This is the location of the removable 
discontinuity. This is true if the multiplicity of this factor is greater than or equal to that in the denominator. If the 
multiplicity of this factor is greater in the denominator, then there is still an asymptote at that value. 

EXAMPLE 6 

Identifying Vertical Asymptotes and Removable Discontinuities for a Graph 
Find the vertical asymptotes and removable discontinuities of the graph of 

Solution 
Factor the numerator and the denominator. 

Notice that there is a common factor in the numerator and the denominator,  The zero for this factor is  This is 
the location of the removable discontinuity. 
Notice that there is a factor in the denominator that is not in the numerator,  The zero for this factor is  The 
vertical asymptote is  See Figure 11. 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.6 • Rational Functions     483

Figure 11 
The graph of this function will have the vertical asymptote at  but at  the graph will have a hole. 

 TRY IT #5 Find the vertical asymptotes and removable discontinuities of the graph of 

Identifying Horizontal Asymptotes of Rational Functions 
While vertical asymptotes describe the behavior of a graph as the output gets very large or very small, horizontal 
asymptotes help describe the behavior of a graph as the input gets very large or very small. Recall that a polynomial’s 
end behavior will mirror that of the leading term. Likewise, a rational function’s end behavior will mirror that of the ratio 
of the function that is the ratio of the leading terms. 
There are three distinct outcomes when checking for horizontal asymptotes: 
Case 1: If the degree of the denominator > degree of the numerator, there is a horizontal asymptote at 

In this case, the end behavior is  This tells us that, as the inputs increase or decrease without bound, this 
function will behave similarly to the function  and the outputs will approach zero, resulting in a horizontal 
asymptote at  See Figure 12. Note that this graph crosses the horizontal asymptote. 

Figure 12 Horizontal asymptote  when 

Case 2: If the degree of the denominator < degree of the numerator by one, we get a slant asymptote. 



484     5 • Polynomial and Rational Functions

In this case, the end behavior is  This tells us that as the inputs increase or decrease without bound, 
this function will behave similarly to the function  As the inputs grow large, the outputs will grow and not level 
off, so this graph has no horizontal asymptote. However, the graph of  looks like a diagonal line, and since 
will behave similarly to  it will approach a line close to  This line is a slant asymptote. 

To find the equation of the slant asymptote, divide  The quotient is  and the remainder is 2. The slant 
asymptote is the graph of the line  See Figure 13. 

Figure 13 Slant asymptote when  where degree of 

Case 3: If the degree of the denominator = degree of the numerator, there is a horizontal asymptote at  where 
and  are the leading coefficients of  and  for 

In this case, the end behavior is  This tells us that as the inputs grow large, this function will behave like 

the function  which is a horizontal line. As ∞  resulting in a horizontal asymptote at  See 
Figure 14. Note that this graph crosses the horizontal asymptote. 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.6 • Rational Functions     485

Figure 14 Horizontal asymptote when 

Notice that, while the graph of a rational function will never cross a vertical asymptote, the graph may or may not cross a 
horizontal or slant asymptote. Also, although the graph of a rational function may have many vertical asymptotes, the 
graph will have at most one horizontal (or slant) asymptote. 
It should be noted that, if the degree of the numerator is larger than the degree of the denominator by more than one, 
the end behavior of the graph will mimic the behavior of the reduced end behavior fraction. For instance, if we had the 
function 

with end behavior 

the end behavior of the graph would look similar to that of an even polynomial with a positive leading coefficient. 

∞ ∞

Horizontal Asymptotes of Rational Functions 

The horizontal asymptote of a rational function can be determined by looking at the degrees of the numerator and 
denominator. 

• Degree of numerator is less than degree of denominator: horizontal asymptote at 
• Degree of numerator is greater than degree of denominator by one: no horizontal asymptote; slant asymptote. 
• Degree of numerator is equal to degree of denominator: horizontal asymptote at ratio of leading coefficients. 

EXAMPLE 7 

Identifying Horizontal and Slant Asymptotes 
For the functions listed, identify the horizontal or slant asymptote. 

ⓐ   ⓑ   ⓒ  
Solution 

For these solutions, we will use 

ⓐ   The degree of  so we can find the horizontal asymptote by taking the ratio 
of the leading terms. There is a horizontal asymptote at  or 



486     5 • Polynomial and Rational Functions

ⓑ   The degree of  and degree of  Since  by 1, there is a slant asymptote found at 

 
The quotient is  and the remainder is 13. There is a slant asymptote at 

ⓒ   The degree of  degree of  so there is a horizontal asymptote 

EXAMPLE 8 

Identifying Horizontal Asymptotes 
In the sugar concentration problem earlier, we created the equation 

Find the horizontal asymptote and interpret it in context of the problem. 

Solution 
Both the numerator and denominator are linear (degree 1). Because the degrees are equal, there will be a horizontal 
asymptote at the ratio of the leading coefficients. In the numerator, the leading term is  with coefficient 1. In the 
denominator, the leading term is  with coefficient 10. The horizontal asymptote will be at the ratio of these values: 

∞

This function will have a horizontal asymptote at 

This tells us that as the values of t increase, the values of  will approach  In context, this means that, as more time 
goes by, the concentration of sugar in the tank will approach one-tenth of a pound of sugar per gallon of water or 
pounds per gallon. 

EXAMPLE 9 

Identifying Horizontal and Vertical Asymptotes 
Find the horizontal and vertical asymptotes of the function 

Solution 
First, note that this function has no common factors, so there are no potential removable discontinuities. 
The function will have vertical asymptotes when the denominator is zero, causing the function to be undefined. The 
denominator will be zero at  indicating vertical asymptotes at these values. 
The numerator has degree 2, while the denominator has degree 3. Since the degree of the denominator is greater than 
the degree of the numerator, the denominator will grow faster than the numerator, causing the outputs to tend towards 
zero as the inputs get large, and so as ∞  This function will have a horizontal asymptote at  See 
Figure 15. 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.6 • Rational Functions     487

Figure 15 

 TRY IT #6 Find the vertical and horizontal asymptotes of the function: 

Intercepts of Rational Functions 

A rational function will have a y-intercept at  , if the function is defined at zero. A rational function will not have a 
y-intercept if the function is not defined at zero. 

Likewise, a rational function will have x-intercepts at the inputs that cause the output to be zero. Since a fraction is 
only equal to zero when the numerator is zero, x-intercepts can only occur when the numerator of the rational 
function is equal to zero. 

EXAMPLE 10 

Finding the Intercepts of a Rational Function 
Find the intercepts of 

Solution 
We can find the y-intercept by evaluating the function at zero 

The x-intercepts will occur when the function is equal to zero: 



488     5 • Polynomial and Rational Functions

The y-intercept is  the x-intercepts are  and  See Figure 16. 

Figure 16 

 TRY IT #7 Given the reciprocal squared function that is shifted right 3 units and down 4 units, write this as a 
rational function. Then, find the x- and y-intercepts and the horizontal and vertical asymptotes. 

Graphing Rational Functions 
In Example 9, we see that the numerator of a rational function reveals the x-intercepts of the graph, whereas the 
denominator reveals the vertical asymptotes of the graph. As with polynomials, factors of the numerator may have 
integer powers greater than one. Fortunately, the effect on the shape of the graph at those intercepts is the same as we 
saw with polynomials. 
The vertical asymptotes associated with the factors of the denominator will mirror one of the two toolkit reciprocal 
functions. When the degree of the factor in the denominator is odd, the distinguishing characteristic is that on one side 
of the vertical asymptote the graph heads towards positive infinity, and on the other side the graph heads towards 
negative infinity. See Figure 17. 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.6 • Rational Functions     489

Figure 17 
When the degree of the factor in the denominator is even, the distinguishing characteristic is that the graph either heads 
toward positive infinity on both sides of the vertical asymptote or heads toward negative infinity on both sides. See 
Figure 18. 

Figure 18 

For example, the graph of  is shown in Figure 19. 



490     5 • Polynomial and Rational Functions

Figure 19 

• At the x-intercept  corresponding to the  factor of the numerator, the graph "bounces", consistent 
with the quadratic nature of the factor. 

• At the x-intercept  corresponding to the  factor of the numerator, the graph passes through the axis as 
we would expect from a linear factor. 

• At the vertical asymptote  corresponding to the  factor of the denominator, the graph heads towards 
positive infinity on both sides of the asymptote, consistent with the behavior of the function 

• At the vertical asymptote  corresponding to the  factor of the denominator, the graph heads towards 
positive infinity on the left side of the asymptote and towards negative infinity on the right side. 

...
HOW TO 

Given a rational function, sketch a graph. 

1. Evaluate the function at 0 to find the y-intercept. 
2. Factor the numerator and denominator. 
3. For factors in the numerator not common to the denominator, determine where each factor of the numerator is 

zero to find the x-intercepts. 
4. Find the multiplicities of the x-intercepts to determine the behavior of the graph at those points. 
5. For factors in the denominator, note the multiplicities of the zeros to determine the local behavior. For those 

factors not common to the numerator, find the vertical asymptotes by setting those factors equal to zero and 
then solve. 

6. For factors in the denominator common to factors in the numerator, find the removable discontinuities by setting 
those factors equal to 0 and then solve. 

7. Compare the degrees of the numerator and the denominator to determine the horizontal or slant asymptotes. 
8. Sketch the graph. 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.6 • Rational Functions     491

EXAMPLE 11 

Graphing a Rational Function 
Sketch a graph of 

Solution 
We can start by noting that the function is already factored, saving us a step. 
Next, we will find the intercepts. Evaluating the function at zero gives the y-intercept: 

To find the x-intercepts, we determine when the numerator of the function is zero. Setting each factor equal to zero, we 
find x-intercepts at  and  At each, the behavior will be linear (multiplicity 1), with the graph passing through 
the intercept. 
We have a y-intercept at  and x-intercepts at  and 
To find the vertical asymptotes, we determine when the denominator is equal to zero. This occurs when  and 
when  giving us vertical asymptotes at  and 
There are no common factors in the numerator and denominator. This means there are no removable discontinuities. 
Finally, the degree of denominator is larger than the degree of the numerator, telling us this graph has a horizontal 
asymptote at 
To sketch the graph, we might start by plotting the three intercepts. Since the graph has no x-intercepts between the 
vertical asymptotes, and the y-intercept is positive, we know the function must remain positive between the asymptotes, 
letting us fill in the middle portion of the graph as shown in Figure 20. 

Figure 20 
The factor associated with the vertical asymptote at  was squared, so we know the behavior will be the same on 
both sides of the asymptote. The graph heads toward positive infinity as the inputs approach the asymptote on the right, 
so the graph will head toward positive infinity on the left as well. 
For the vertical asymptote at  the factor was not squared, so the graph will have opposite behavior on either side 
of the asymptote. See Figure 21. After passing through the x-intercepts, the graph will then level off toward an output of 
zero, as indicated by the horizontal asymptote. 



492     5 • Polynomial and Rational Functions

Figure 21 

 TRY IT #8 Given the function  use the characteristics of polynomials and rational 
functions to describe its behavior and sketch the function. 

Writing Rational Functions 
Now that we have analyzed the equations for rational functions and how they relate to a graph of the function, we can 
use information given by a graph to write the function. A rational function written in factored form will have an 
x-intercept where each factor of the numerator is equal to zero. (An exception occurs in the case of a removable 
discontinuity.) As a result, we can form a numerator of a function whose graph will pass through a set of x-intercepts by 
introducing a corresponding set of factors. Likewise, because the function will have a vertical asymptote where each 
factor of the denominator is equal to zero, we can form a denominator that will produce the vertical asymptotes by 
introducing a corresponding set of factors. 

Writing Rational Functions from Intercepts and Asymptotes 

If a rational function has x-intercepts at  vertical asymptotes at  and no 
 then the function can be written in the form: 

where the powers  or  on each factor can be determined by the behavior of the graph at the corresponding 
intercept or asymptote, and the stretch factor  can be determined given a value of the function other than the 
x-intercept or by the horizontal asymptote if it is nonzero. 

...
HOW TO 

Given a graph of a rational function, write the function. 

1. Determine the factors of the numerator. Examine the behavior of the graph at the x-intercepts to determine the 
zeroes and their multiplicities. (This is easy to do when finding the “simplest” function with small 
multiplicities—such as 1 or 3—but may be difficult for larger multiplicities—such as 5 or 7, for example.) 

2. Determine the factors of the denominator. Examine the behavior on both sides of each vertical asymptote to 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.6 • Rational Functions     493

determine the factors and their powers. 
3. Use any clear point on the graph to find the stretch factor. 

EXAMPLE 12 

Writing a Rational Function from Intercepts and Asymptotes 
Write an equation for the rational function shown in Figure 22. 

Figure 22 

Solution 
The graph appears to have x-intercepts at  and  At both, the graph passes through the intercept, 
suggesting linear factors. The graph has two vertical asymptotes. The one at  seems to exhibit the basic behavior 
similar to  with the graph heading toward positive infinity on one side and heading toward negative infinity on the 
other. The asymptote at  is exhibiting a behavior similar to  with the graph heading toward negative infinity on 
both sides of the asymptote. See Figure 23. 

Figure 23 
We can use this information to write a function of the form 

To find the stretch factor, we can use another clear point on the graph, such as the y-intercept 



494     5 • Polynomial and Rational Functions

This gives us a final function of 

 MEDIA 

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with rational functions. 

Graphing Rational Functions (https://openstax.org/l/graphrational) 
Find the Equation of a Rational Function (https://openstax.org/l/equatrational) 
Determining Vertical and Horizontal Asymptotes (https://openstax.org/l/asymptote) 
Find the Intercepts, Asymptotes, and Hole of a Rational Function (https://openstax.org/l/interasymptote) 

 5.6 SECTION EXERCISES 
Verbal 

1 . What is the fundamental  2 . What is the fundamental  3 . If the graph of a rational 
difference in the algebraic difference in the graphs of function has a removable 
representation of a polynomial functions and discontinuity, what must be 
polynomial function and a rational functions? true of the functional rule? 
rational function? 

4 . Can a graph of a rational  5 . Can a graph of a rational 
function have no vertical function have no 
asymptote? If so, how? x-intercepts? If so, how? 

Algebraic 

For the following exercises, find the domain of the rational functions. 

6 .  7 .  8 . 

9 . 

For the following exercises, find the domain, vertical asymptotes, and horizontal asymptotes of the functions. 

10 .  11 .  12 . 

13 .  14 .  15 . 

16 .  17 .  18 . 

19 . 

For the following exercises, find the x- and y-intercepts for the functions. 

20 .  21 .  22 . 

23 .  24 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.6 • Rational Functions     495

For the following exercises, describe the local and end behavior of the functions. 

25 . 26 .  27 . 

28 .  29 . 

For the following exercises, find the slant asymptote of the functions. 

30 .  31 .  32 . 

33 .  34 . 

Graphical 

For the following exercises, use the given transformation to graph the function. Note the vertical and horizontal 
asymptotes. 
35 . The reciprocal function 36 . The reciprocal function  37 . The reciprocal squared 

shifted up two units. shifted down one unit and function shifted to the 
left three units. right 2 units. 

38 . The reciprocal squared 
function shifted down 2 
units and right 1 unit. 

For the following exercises, find the horizontal intercepts, the vertical intercept, the vertical asymptotes, and the 
horizontal or slant asymptote of the functions. Use that information to sketch a graph. 

39 . 40 .  41 . 

42 .  43 . 44 . 

45 . 46 .  47 . 

48 .  49 . 50 . 

For the following exercises, write an equation for a rational function with the given characteristics. 
51 . Vertical asymptotes at  and  52 . Vertical asymptotes at  and 

x-intercepts at  and  y-intercept at x-intercepts at  and  y-intercept at 

53 . Vertical asymptotes at  and  54 . Vertical asymptotes at  and 
x-intercepts at  and  Horizontal x-intercepts at  and  Horizontal 
asymptote at asymptote at 

55 . Vertical asymptote at  Double zero at  56 . Vertical asymptote at  Double zero at 
 y-intercept at y-intercept at 



496     5 • Polynomial and Rational Functions

For the following exercises, use the graphs to write an equation for the function. 
57 . 58 . 59 . 

60 . 61 . 62 . 

63 . 64 . Use  as the additional point. 

Numeric 

For the following exercises, make tables to show the behavior of the function near the vertical asymptote and reflecting 
the horizontal asymptote 

65 . 66 .  67 . 

68 .  69 . 

Technology 

For the following exercises, use a calculator to graph  Use the graph to solve 

70 .  71 . 72 . 

73 . 74 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.6 • Rational Functions     497

Extensions 

For the following exercises, identify the removable discontinuity. 

75 .  76 .  77 . 

78 .  79 . 

Real-World Applications 

For the following exercises, express a rational function that describes the situation. 
80 . In the refugee camp hospital, a large mixing tank  81 . In the refugee camp hospital, a large mixing tank 

currently contains 200 gallons of water, into which currently contains 300 gallons of water, into which 
10 pounds of sugar have been mixed. A tap will 8 pounds of sugar have been mixed. A tap will 
open, pouring 10 gallons of water per minute into open, pouring 20 gallons of water per minute into 
the tank at the same time sugar is poured into the the tank at the same time sugar is poured into the 
tank at a rate of 3 pounds per minute. Find the tank at a rate of 2 pounds per minute. Find the 
concentration (pounds per gallon) of sugar in the concentration (pounds per gallon) of sugar in the 
tank after  minutes. tank after  minutes. 

For the following exercises, use the given rational function to answer the question. 
82 . The concentration  of a drug in a patient’s  83 . The concentration  of a drug in a patient’s 

bloodstream  hours after injection is given by bloodstream  hours after injection is given by 
 What happens to the concentration  Use a calculator to approximate 

of the drug as  increases? the time when the concentration is highest. 

For the following exercises, construct a rational function that will help solve the problem. Then, use a calculator to 
answer the question. 
84 . An open box with a square  85 . A rectangular box with a  86 . A right circular cylinder has 

base is to have a volume of square base is to have a volume of 100 cubic 
108 cubic inches. Find the volume of 20 cubic feet. inches. Find the radius and 
dimensions of the box that The material for the base height that will yield 
will have minimum surface costs 30 cents/ square foot. minimum surface area. Let 
area. Let  = length of the The material for the sides  = radius. 
side of the base. costs 10 cents/square foot. 

The material for the top 
costs 20 cents/square foot. 
Determine the dimensions 
that will yield minimum 
cost. Let  = length of the 
side of the base. 

87 . A right circular cylinder  88 . A right circular cylinder is 
with no top has a volume to have a volume of 40 
of 50 cubic meters. Find cubic inches. It costs 4 
the radius that will yield cents/square inch to 
minimum surface area. Let construct the top and 

 = radius. bottom and 1 cent/square 
inch to construct the rest 
of the cylinder. Find the 
radius to yield minimum 
cost. Let  = radius. 



498     5 • Polynomial and Rational Functions

5.7 Inverses and Radical Functions 
Learning Objectives 
In this section, you will: 

Find the inverse of an invertible polynomial function. 
Restrict the domain to find the inverse of a polynomial function. 

Park rangers and other trail managers may construct rock piles, stacks, or other arrangements, usually called cairns, to 
mark trails or other landmarks. (Rangers and environmental scientists discourage hikers from doing the same, in order 
to avoid confusion and preserve the habitats of plants and animals.) A cairn in the form of a mound of gravel is in the 
shape of a cone with the height equal to twice the radius. 

Figure 1 
The volume is found using a formula from elementary geometry. 

We have written the volume  in terms of the radius  However, in some cases, we may start out with the volume and 
want to find the radius. For example: A customer purchases 100 cubic feet of gravel to construct a cone shape mound 
with a height twice the radius. What are the radius and height of the new cone? To answer this question, we use the 
formula 

This function is the inverse of the formula for  in terms of 
In this section, we will explore the inverses of polynomial and rational functions and in particular the radical functions we 
encounter in the process. 

Finding the Inverse of a Polynomial Function 
Two functions  and  are inverse functions if for every coordinate pair in  there exists a corresponding 
coordinate pair in the inverse function,  In other words, the coordinate pairs of the inverse functions have the 
input and output interchanged. Only one-to-one functions have inverses. Recall that a one-to-one function has a unique 
output value for each input value and passes the horizontal line test. 
For example, suppose the Sustainability Club builds a water runoff collector in the shape of a parabolic trough as shown 
in Figure 2. We can use the information in the figure to find the surface area of the water in the trough as a function of 
the depth of the water. 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.7 • Inverses and Radical Functions     499

Figure 2 
Because it will be helpful to have an equation for the parabolic cross-sectional shape, we will impose a coordinate system 
at the cross section, with  measured horizontally and  measured vertically, with the origin at the vertex of the 
parabola. See Figure 3. 

Figure 3 
From this we find an equation for the parabolic shape. We placed the origin at the vertex of the parabola, so we know 
the equation will have form  Our equation will need to pass through the point (6, 18), from which we can 
solve for the stretch factor 

Our parabolic cross section has the equation 

We are interested in the surface area of the water, so we must determine the width at the top of the water as a function 
of the water depth. For any depth  the width will be given by  so we need to solve the equation above for  and find 
the inverse function. However, notice that the original function is not one-to-one, and indeed, given any output there are 
two inputs that produce the same output, one positive and one negative. 
To find an inverse, we can restrict our original function to a limited domain on which it is one-to-one. In this case, it 
makes sense to restrict ourselves to positive  values. On this domain, we can find an inverse by solving for the input 
variable: 



500     5 • Polynomial and Rational Functions

This is not a function as written. Since we are limiting ourselves to positive  values in the original function, we can 
eliminate the negative solution, which gives us the inverse function we’re looking for. 

Because  is the distance from the center of the parabola to either side, the entire width of the water at the top will be 
 The trough is 3 feet (36 inches) long, so the surface area will then be: 

This example illustrates two important points: 
1. When finding the inverse of a quadratic, we have to limit ourselves to a domain on which the function is one-to-one. 
2. The inverse of a quadratic function is a square root function. Both are toolkit functions and different types of power 

functions. 
Functions involving roots are often called radical functions. While it is not possible to find an inverse of most polynomial 
functions, some basic polynomials do have inverses. Such functions are called invertible functions, and we use the 
notation 

Warning:  is not the same as the reciprocal of the function  This use of “–1” is reserved to denote inverse 
functions. To denote the reciprocal of a function  we would need to write 

An important relationship between inverse functions is that they “undo” each other. If  is the inverse of a function 
then  is the inverse of the function  In other words, whatever the function  does to   undoes it—and vice-
versa. 

and 

Note that the inverse switches the domain and range of the original function. 

Verifying Two Functions Are Inverses of One Another 

Two functions,  and  are inverses of one another if for all  in the domain of  and 

...
HOW TO 

Given a polynomial function, find the inverse of the function by restricting the domain in such a way that the 
new function is one-to-one. 

1. Replace  with 
2. Interchange  and 
3. Solve for  and rename the function 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.7 • Inverses and Radical Functions     501

EXAMPLE 1 

Verifying Inverse Functions 
Show that  and  are inverses, for  . 

Solution 
We must show that  and 

Therefore,  and  are inverses. 

 TRY IT #1 Show that  and  are inverses. 

EXAMPLE 2 

Finding the Inverse of a Cubic Function 
Find the inverse of the function 

Solution 
This is a transformation of the basic cubic toolkit function, and based on our knowledge of that function, we know it is 
one-to-one. Solving for the inverse by solving for 

Analysis 
Look at the graph of  and  Notice that one graph is the reflection of the other about the line  This is always 
the case when graphing a function and its inverse function. 
Also, since the method involved interchanging  and  notice corresponding points. If  is on the graph of  then 

 is on the graph of  Since  is on the graph of  then  is on the graph of  Similarly, since  is 
on the graph of  then  is on the graph of  See Figure 4. 



502     5 • Polynomial and Rational Functions

Figure 4 

 TRY IT #2 Find the inverse function of 

Restricting the Domain to Find the Inverse of a Polynomial Function 
So far, we have been able to find the inverse functions of cubic functions without having to restrict their domains. 
However, as we know, not all cubic polynomials are one-to-one. Some functions that are not one-to-one may have their 
domain restricted so that they are one-to-one, but only over that domain. The function over the restricted domain would 
then have an inverse function. Since quadratic functions are not one-to-one, we must restrict their domain in order to 
find their inverses. 

Restricting the Domain 

If a function is not one-to-one, it cannot have an inverse. If we restrict the domain of the function so that it becomes 
one-to-one, thus creating a new function, this new function will have an inverse. 

...
HOW TO 

Given a polynomial function, restrict the domain of a function that is not one-to-one and then find the inverse. 

1. Restrict the domain by determining a domain on which the original function is one-to-one. 
2. Replace  with 
3. Interchange  and 
4. Solve for  and rename the function or pair of function 
5. Revise the formula for  by ensuring that the outputs of the inverse function correspond to the restricted 

domain of the original function. 

EXAMPLE 3 

Restricting the Domain to Find the Inverse of a Polynomial Function 
Find the inverse function of 

ⓐ   ⓑ  

Access for free at openstax.org



5.7 • Inverses and Radical Functions     503

Solution 
The original function  is not one-to-one, but the function is restricted to a domain of  or  on 
which it is one-to-one. See Figure 5. 

Figure 5 
To find the inverse, start by replacing  with the simple variable 

This is not a function as written. We need to examine the restrictions on the domain of the original function to determine 
the inverse. Since we reversed the roles of  and  for the original  we looked at the domain: the values  could 
assume. When we reversed the roles of  and  this gave us the values  could assume. For this function,  so for 
the inverse, we should have  which is what our inverse function gives. 

ⓐ The domain of the original function was restricted to  so the outputs of the inverse need to be the same, 
 and we must use the + case: 

ⓑ  The domain of the original function was restricted to  so the outputs of the inverse need to be the same, 
 and we must use the – case: 

Analysis 
On the graphs in Figure 6, we see the original function graphed on the same set of axes as its inverse function. Notice 
that together the graphs show symmetry about the line  The coordinate pair  is on the graph of  and the 
coordinate pair  is on the graph of  For any coordinate pair, if  is on the graph of  then  is on the 
graph of  Finally, observe that the graph of  intersects the graph of  on the line  Points of intersection for 
the graphs of  and  will always lie on the line 

Figure 6 



504     5 • Polynomial and Rational Functions

EXAMPLE 4 

Finding the Inverse of a Quadratic Function When the Restriction Is Not Specified 
Restrict the domain and then find the inverse of 

Solution 
We can see this is a parabola with vertex at  that opens upward. Because the graph will be decreasing on one side 
of the vertex and increasing on the other side, we can restrict this function to a domain on which it will be one-to-one by 
limiting the domain to 
To find the inverse, we will use the vertex form of the quadratic. We start by replacing  with a simple variable,  then 
solve for 

  
  
  
  
  

Now we need to determine which case to use. Because we restricted our original function to a domain of  the 
outputs of the inverse should be the same, telling us to utilize the + case 

If the quadratic had not been given in vertex form, rewriting it into vertex form would be the first step. This way we may 
easily observe the coordinates of the vertex to help us restrict the domain. 

Analysis 
Notice that we arbitrarily decided to restrict the domain on  We could just have easily opted to restrict the domain 
on  in which case  Observe the original function graphed on the same set of axes as its 
inverse function in Figure 7. Notice that both graphs show symmetry about the line  The coordinate pair 
is on the graph of  and the coordinate pair  is on the graph of  Observe from the graph of both functions 
on the same set of axes that 

∞
and 

∞

Finally, observe that the graph of  intersects the graph of  along the line 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.7 • Inverses and Radical Functions     505

Figure 7 

 TRY IT #3 Find the inverse of the function  on the domain 

Solving Applications of Radical Functions 
Notice that the functions from previous examples were all polynomials, and their inverses were radical functions. If we 
want to find the inverse of a radical function, we will need to restrict the domain of the answer because the range of the 
original function is limited. 

...
HOW TO 

Given a radical function, find the inverse. 

1. Determine the range of the original function. 
2. Replace  with  then solve for 
3. If necessary, restrict the domain of the inverse function to the range of the original function. 

EXAMPLE 5 

Finding the Inverse of a Radical Function 
Restrict the domain of the function  and then find the inverse. 

Solution 
Note that the original function has range  Replace  with  then solve for 

Recall that the domain of this function must be limited to the range of the original function. 

Analysis 
Notice in Figure 8 that the inverse is a reflection of the original function over the line  Because the original function 



506     5 • Polynomial and Rational Functions

has only positive outputs, the inverse function has only positive inputs. 

Figure 8 

 TRY IT #4 Restrict the domain and then find the inverse of the function 

Solving Applications of Radical Functions 
Radical functions are common in physical models, as we saw in the section opener. We now have enough tools to be able 
to solve the problem posed at the start of the section. 

EXAMPLE 6 

Solving an Application with a Cubic Function 
Park rangers construct a mound of gravel in the shape of a cone with the height equal to twice the radius. The volume of 
the cone in terms of the radius is given by 

Find the inverse of the function  that determines the volume  of a cone and is a function of the radius 
Then use the inverse function to calculate the radius of such a mound of gravel measuring 100 cubic feet. Use 

Solution 
Start with the given function for  Notice that the meaningful domain for the function is  since negative radii 
would not make sense in this context nor would a radius of 0. Also note the range of the function (hence, the domain of 
the inverse function) is  Solve for  in terms of  using the method outlined previously. Note that in real-world 
applications, we do not swap the variables when finding inverses. Instead, we change which variable is considered to be 
the independent variable. 

This is the result stated in the section opener. Now evaluate this for  and 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.7 • Inverses and Radical Functions     507

Therefore, the radius is about 3.63 ft. 

Determining the Domain of a Radical Function Composed with Other Functions 
When radical functions are composed with other functions, determining domain can become more complicated. 

EXAMPLE 7 

Finding the Domain of a Radical Function Composed with a Rational Function 
Find the domain of the function 

Solution 
Because a square root is only defined when the quantity under the radical is non-negative, we need to determine where 

 The output of a rational function can change signs (change from positive to negative or vice versa) at 
x-intercepts and at vertical asymptotes. For this equation, the graph could change signs at 
To determine the intervals on which the rational expression is positive, we could test some values in the expression or 
sketch a graph. While both approaches work equally well, for this example we will use a graph as shown in Figure 9. 

Figure 9 
This function has two x-intercepts, both of which exhibit linear behavior near the x-intercepts. There is one vertical 
asymptote, corresponding to a linear factor; this behavior is similar to the basic reciprocal toolkit function, and there is 
no horizontal asymptote because the degree of the numerator is larger than the degree of the denominator. There is a 
y-intercept at 

From the y-intercept and x-intercept at  we can sketch the left side of the graph. From the behavior at the 
asymptote, we can sketch the right side of the graph. 
From the graph, we can now tell on which intervals the outputs will be non-negative, so that we can be sure that the 
original function  will be defined.  has domain  or in interval notation, ∞

Finding Inverses of Rational Functions 
As with finding inverses of quadratic functions, it is sometimes desirable to find the inverse of a rational function, 
particularly of rational functions that are the ratio of linear functions, such as in concentration applications. 

EXAMPLE 8 

Finding the Inverse of a Rational Function 
The function  represents the concentration  of an acid solution after  mL of 40% solution has been added 
to 100 mL of a 20% solution. First, find the inverse of the function; that is, find an expression for  in terms of  Then 



508     5 • Polynomial and Rational Functions

use your result to determine how much of the 40% solution should be added so that the final mixture is a 35% solution. 

Solution 
We first want the inverse of the function in order to determine how many mL we need for a given concentration. We will 
solve for  in terms of 

Now evaluate this function at 35%, which is 

We can conclude that 300 mL of the 40% solution should be added. 

 TRY IT #5 Find the inverse of the function 

 MEDIA 

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with inverses and radical functions. 

Graphing the Basic Square Root Function (https://openstax.org/l/graphsquareroot) 
Find the Inverse of a Square Root Function (https://openstax.org/l/inversesquare) 
Find the Inverse of a Rational Function (https://openstax.org/l/inverserational) 
Find the Inverse of a Rational Function and an Inverse Function Value (https://openstax.org/l/rationalinverse) 
Inverse Functions (https://openstax.org/l/inversefunction) 

 5.7 SECTION EXERCISES 
Verbal 

1 . Explain why we cannot find  2 . Why must we restrict the  3 . When finding the inverse of 
inverse functions for all domain of a quadratic a radical function, what 
polynomial functions. function when finding its restriction will we need to 

inverse? make? 
4 . The inverse of a quadratic 

function will always take 
what form? 

Algebraic 

For the following exercises, find the inverse of the function on the given domain. 

5 . ∞  6 . ∞  7 . ∞

8 . ∞ 9 . ∞ 10 . ∞

11 . ∞

Access for free at openstax.org



5.7 • Inverses and Radical Functions     509

For the following exercises, find the inverse of the functions. 

12 . 13 . 14 . 

15 . 

For the following exercises, find the inverse of the functions. 

16 . 17 . 18 . 

19 . 20 . 21 . 

22 . 23 . 24 . 

25 . 26 . 27 . 

28 . ∞ 29 . ∞ 30 . ∞

Graphical 

For the following exercises, find the inverse of the function and graph both the function and its inverse. 

31 . 32 . 33 . 

34 . 35 . 36 . 

37 . 38 . 39 . 

40 . 

For the following exercises, use a graph to help determine the domain of the functions. 

41 . 42 . 43 . 

44 . 45 . 

Technology 

For the following exercises, use a calculator to graph the function. Then, using the graph, give three points on the graph 
of the inverse with y-coordinates given. 

46 . 47 . 48 . 

49 . 50 . 

Extensions 

For the following exercises, find the inverse of the functions with  positive real numbers. 

51 . 52 . 53 . 

54 . 55 . 

Real-World Applications 

For the following exercises, determine the function described and then use it to answer the question. 
56 . An object dropped from a height of 200 meters  57 . An object dropped from a height of 600 feet has a 

has a height,  in meters after  seconds have height,  in feet after  seconds have elapsed, 
lapsed, such that  Express  as such that  Express  as a 
a function of height,  and find the time to reach function of height  and find the time to reach a 
a height of 50 meters. height of 400 feet. 



510     5 • Polynomial and Rational Functions

58 . The volume,  of a sphere in terms of its radius,  59 . The surface area,  of a sphere in terms of its 
 is given by  Express  as a function radius,  is given by  Express  as a 

of  and find the radius of a sphere with volume function of  and find the radius of a sphere with 
of 200 cubic feet. a surface area of 1000 square inches. 

60 . A container holds 100 mL of a solution that is 25  61 . The period  in seconds, of a simple pendulum 
mL acid. If  mL of a solution that is 60% acid is as a function of its length  in feet, is given by 
added, the function  gives the  . Express  as a function of  and 
concentration,  as a function of the number of determine the length of a pendulum with period 
mL added,  Express  as a function of  and of 2 seconds. 
determine the number of mL that need to be 
added to have a solution that is 50% acid. 

62 . The volume of a cylinder ,  in terms of radius,  63 . The surface area,  of a cylinder in terms of its 
and height,  is given by  If a cylinder radius,  and height,  is given by 
has a height of 6 meters, express the radius as a  If the height of the cylinder is 4 
function of  and find the radius of a cylinder with feet, express the radius as a function of  and find 
volume of 300 cubic meters. the radius if the surface area is 200 square feet. 

64 . The volume of a right circular cone,  in terms of  65 . Consider a cone with height of 30 feet. Express 
its radius,  and its height,  is given by the radius,  in terms of the volume,  and find 

 Express  in terms of  if the height the radius of a cone with volume of 1000 cubic 
of the cone is 12 feet and find the radius of a cone feet. 
with volume of 50 cubic inches. 

5.8 Modeling Using Variation 
Learning Objectives 
In this section, you will: 

Solve direct variation problems. 
Solve inverse variation problems. 
Solve problems involving joint variation. 

A pre-owned car dealer has just offered their best candidate, Nicole, a position in sales. The position offers 16% 
commission on her sales. Her earnings depend on the amount of her sales. For instance, if she sells a vehicle for $4,600, 
she will earn $736. As she considers the offer, she takes into account the typical price of the dealer's cars, the overall 
market, and how many she can reasonably expect to sell. In this section, we will look at relationships, such as this one, 
between earnings, sales, and commission rate. 

Solving Direct Variation Problems 
In the example above, Nicole’s earnings can be found by multiplying her sales by her commission. The formula 
tells us her earnings,  come from the product of 0.16, her commission, and the sale price of the vehicle. If we create a 
table, we observe that as the sales price increases, the earnings increase as well, which should be intuitive. See Table 1. 

 , sales price Interpretation 

$4,600 A sale of a $4,600 vehicle results in $736 earnings. 

$9,200 A sale of a $9,200 vehicle results in $1472 earnings. 

$18,400 A sale of a $18,400 vehicle results in $2944 earnings. 

Table 1 

Notice that earnings are a multiple of sales. As sales increase, earnings increase in a predictable way. Double the sales of 
the vehicle from $4,600 to $9,200, and we double the earnings from $736 to $1,472. As the input increases, the output 
increases as a multiple of the input. A relationship in which one quantity is a constant multiplied by another quantity is 
called direct variation. Each variable in this type of relationship varies directly with the other. 
Figure 1 represents the data for Nicole’s potential earnings. We say that earnings vary directly with the sales price of the 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.8 • Modeling Using Variation     511

car. The formula  is used for direct variation. The value  is a nonzero constant greater than zero and is called the 
constant of variation. In this case,  and  We saw functions like this one when we discussed power 
functions. 

Figure 1 

Direct Variation 

If  are related by an equation of the form 

then we say that the relationship is direct variation and  varies directly with, or is proportional to, the th power of 
 In direct variation relationships, there is a nonzero constant ratio  where  is called the constant of 

variation, which helps to define the relationship between the variables. 

...
HOW TO 

Given a description of a direct variation problem, solve for an unknown. 

1. Identify the input,  and the output, 
2. Determine the constant of variation. You may need to divide  by the specified power of  to determine the 

constant of variation. 
3. Use the constant of variation to write an equation for the relationship. 
4. Substitute known values into the equation to find the unknown. 

EXAMPLE 1 

Solving a Direct Variation Problem 
The quantity  varies directly with the cube of  If  when  find  when  is 6. 

Solution 
The general formula for direct variation with a cube is  The constant can be found by dividing  by the cube of 



512     5 • Polynomial and Rational Functions

Now use the constant to write an equation that represents this relationship. 

Substitute  and solve for 

Analysis 
The graph of this equation is a simple cubic, as shown in Figure 2. 

Figure 2 

 Q&A Do the graphs of all direct variation equations look like Example 1? 

No. Direct variation equations are power functions—they may be linear, quadratic, cubic, quartic, 
radical, etc. But all of the graphs pass through 

 TRY IT #1 The quantity  varies directly with the square of  If  when  find  when  is 4. 

Solving Inverse Variation Problems 
Water temperature in an ocean varies inversely to the water’s depth. The formula  gives us the temperature in 
degrees Fahrenheit at a depth in feet below Earth’s surface. Consider the Atlantic Ocean, which covers 22% of Earth’s 
surface. At a certain location, at the depth of 500 feet, the temperature may be 28°F. 
If we create Table 2, we observe that, as the depth increases, the water temperature decreases. 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.8 • Modeling Using Variation     513

 depth Interpretation 

500 ft At a depth of 500 ft, the water temperature is 28° F. 

1000 ft At a depth of 1,000 ft, the water temperature is 14° F. 

2000 ft At a depth of 2,000 ft, the water temperature is 7° F. 

Table 2 

We notice in the relationship between these variables that, as one quantity increases, the other decreases. The two 
quantities are said to be inversely proportional and each term varies inversely with the other. Inversely proportional 
relationships are also called inverse variations. 
For our example, Figure 3 depicts the inverse variation. We say the water temperature varies inversely with the depth of 
the water because, as the depth increases, the temperature decreases. The formula  for inverse variation in this 
case uses 

Figure 3 

Inverse Variation 

If  and  are related by an equation of the form 

where  is a nonzero constant, then we say that  varies inversely with the  power of  In inversely 
proportional relationships, or inverse variations, there is a constant multiple 

EXAMPLE 2 

Writing a Formula for an Inversely Proportional Relationship 
A tourist plans to drive 100 miles. Find a formula for the time the trip will take as a function of the speed the tourist 
drives. 

Solution 
Recall that multiplying speed by time gives distance. If we let  represent the drive time in hours, and  represent the 
velocity (speed or rate) at which the tourist drives, then  Because the distance is fixed at 100 miles, 

 so  Because time is a function of velocity, we can write 



514     5 • Polynomial and Rational Functions

We can see that the constant of variation is 100 and, although we can write the relationship using the negative 
exponent, it is more common to see it written as a fraction. We say that time varies inversely with velocity. 

...
HOW TO 

Given a description of an indirect variation problem, solve for an unknown. 

1. Identify the input,  and the output, 
2. Determine the constant of variation. You may need to multiply  by the specified power of  to determine the 

constant of variation. 
3. Use the constant of variation to write an equation for the relationship. 
4. Substitute known values into the equation to find the unknown. 

EXAMPLE 3 

Solving an Inverse Variation Problem 
A quantity  varies inversely with the cube of  If  when  find  when  is 6. 

Solution 
The general formula for inverse variation with a cube is  The constant can be found by multiplying  by the cube 
of 

Now we use the constant to write an equation that represents this relationship. 

Substitute  and solve for 

Analysis 
The graph of this equation is a rational function, as shown in Figure 4. 

Figure 4 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.8 • Modeling Using Variation     515

 TRY IT #2 A quantity  varies inversely with the square of  If  when  find  when  is 4. 

Solving Problems Involving Joint Variation 
Many situations are more complicated than a basic direct variation or inverse variation model. One variable often 
depends on multiple other variables. When a variable is dependent on the product or quotient of two or more variables, 
this is called joint variation. For example, the cost of busing students for each school trip varies with the number of 
students attending and the distance from the school. The variable  cost, varies jointly with the number of students, 
and the distance, 

Joint Variation 

Joint variation occurs when a variable varies directly or inversely with multiple variables. 

For instance, if  varies directly with both  and  we have  If  varies directly with  and inversely with  we 
have  Notice that we only use one constant in a joint variation equation. 

EXAMPLE 4 

Solving Problems Involving Joint Variation 
A quantity  varies directly with the square of  and inversely with the cube root of  If  when  and  find 

 when  and 

Solution 
Begin by writing an equation to show the relationship between the variables. 

Substitute   and  to find the value of the constant 

Now we can substitute the value of the constant into the equation for the relationship. 

To find  when  and  we will substitute values for  and  into our equation. 

 TRY IT #3 A quantity  varies directly with the square of  and inversely with  If  when  and 
 find  when  and 

 MEDIA 

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with direct and inverse variation. 

Direct Variation (https://openstax.org/l/directvariation) 
Inverse Variation (https://openstax.org/l/inversevariatio) 
Direct and Inverse Variation (https://openstax.org/l/directinverse) 



516     5 • Polynomial and Rational Functions

 5.8 SECTION EXERCISES 
Verbal 

1 . What is true of the  2 . If two variables vary  3 . Is there a limit to the 
appearance of graphs that inversely, what will an number of variables that 
reflect a direct variation equation representing their can vary jointly? Explain. 
between two variables? relationship look like? 

Algebraic 

For the following exercises, write an equation describing the relationship of the given variables. 
4 .  varies directly as  and  5 .  varies directly as the  6 .  varies directly as the 

when square of  and when square root of  and when 
 

7 .  varies directly as the cube  8 .  varies directly as the cube  9 .  varies directly as the 
of  and when root of  and when fourth power of  and when 

10 .  varies inversely as  and  11 .  varies inversely as the  12 .  varies inversely as the 
when square of  and when cube of  and when 

13 .  varies inversely as the  14 .  varies inversely as the  15 .  varies inversely as the 
fourth power of  and square root of  and when cube root of  and when 
when 

16 .  varies jointly with  and  17 .  varies jointly as  and  18 .  varies jointly as the 
and when  and  and when square of  and the square 

of  and when  and 
then  then 

19 .  varies jointly as  and the  20 .  varies jointly as the  21 .  varies jointly as  and 
square root of  and when square of  the cube of and inversely as . When 

 and  then and the square root of , and , 
When  and then 

 then 
22 .  varies jointly as the 23 .  varies jointly as  and 

square of  and the square and inversely as the square 
root of  and inversely as root of  and the square of 
the cube of    When  When 

 and 
 and  then 

then 

Numeric 

For the following exercises, use the given information to find the unknown value. 
24 .  varies directly as  When  then  25 .  varies directly as the square of  When 

Find  wneh then  Find  when 
26 .  varies directly as the cube of  When  27 .  varies directly as the square root of  When 

then  Find  when  then  Find  when 
28 .  varies directly as the cube root of  When  29 .  varies inversely with  When  then 

 then  Find  when Find  when 

Access for free at openstax.org



5.8 • Modeling Using Variation     517

30 .  varies inversely with the square of  When  31 .  varies inversely with the cube of  When 
 then  Find  when then  Find  when 

32 .  varies inversely with the square root of  When  33 .  varies inversely with the cube root of  When 
 then  Find  when  then  Find  when 

34 .  varies jointly as  When  and  35 .  varies jointly as  When  
then  Find  when  and and  then  Find  when 

 and 
36 .  varies jointly as  and the square of  When  37 .  varies jointly as the square of  and the square 

 and  then  Find  when root of  When  and  then 
and Find  when  and 

38 .  varies jointly as  and  and inversely as  39 .  varies jointly as the square of  and the cube of 
When   and  then  Find  and inversely as the square root of    When 

 when  and  and 
  and  then  Find 

when   and 
40 .  varies jointly as the square of  and of  and 

inversely as the square root of  and of  When 
   and  then  Find 

 when    and 

Technology 

For the following exercises, use a calculator to graph the equation implied by the given variation. 
41 .  varies directly with the 42 .  varies directly as the  43 .  varies directly as the 

square of  and when cube of  and when square root of  and when 

44 .  varies inversely with  45 .  varies inversely as the 
and when square of  and when 

Extensions 

For the following exercises, use Kepler’s Law, which states that the square of the time,  required for a planet to orbit 
the Sun varies directly with the cube of the mean distance,  that the planet is from the Sun. 
46 . Using Earth’s time of 1 year  47 . Use the result from the  48 . Using Earth’s distance of 

and mean distance of 93 previous exercise to 150 million kilometers, find 
million miles, find the determine the time the equation relating 
equation relating  and required for Mars to orbit and 

the Sun if its mean 
distance is 142 million 
miles. 

49 . Use the result from the  50 . Using Earth’s distance of 1 
previous exercise to astronomical unit (A.U.), 
determine the time determine the time for 
required for Venus to orbit Saturn to orbit the Sun if 
the Sun if its mean its mean distance is 9.54 
distance is 108 million A.U. 
kilometers. 



518     5 • Polynomial and Rational Functions

Real-World Applications 

For the following exercises, use the given information to answer the questions. 
51 . The distance  that an  52 . The velocity  of a falling  53 . The rate of vibration of a 

object falls varies directly object varies directly to the string under constant 
with the square of the time, , of the fall. If after 2 tension varies inversely 
time,  of the fall. If an seconds, the velocity of the with the length of the 
object falls 16 feet in one object is 64 feet per string. If a string is 24 
second, how long for it to second, what is the velocity inches long and vibrates 
fall 144 feet? after 5 seconds? 128 times per second, what 

is the length of a string 
that vibrates 64 times per 
second? 

54 . The volume of a gas held  55 . The weight of an object  56 . The intensity of light 
at constant temperature above the surface of Earth measured in foot-candles 
varies indirectly as the varies inversely with the varies inversely with the 
pressure of the gas. If the square of the distance square of the distance 
volume of a gas is 1200 from the center of Earth. If from the light source. 
cubic centimeters when a body weighs 50 pounds Suppose the intensity of a 
the pressure is 200 when it is 3960 miles from light bulb is 0.08 foot-
millimeters of mercury, Earth’s center, what would candles at a distance of 3 
what is the volume when it weigh it were 3970 miles meters. Find the intensity 
the pressure is 300 from Earth’s center? level at 8 meters. 
millimeters of mercury? 

57 . The current in a circuit  58 . The force exerted by the  59 . The horsepower (hp) that a 
varies inversely with its wind on a plane surface shaft can safely transmit 
resistance measured in varies jointly with the varies jointly with its speed 
ohms. When the current in square of the velocity of (in revolutions per minute 
a circuit is 40 amperes, the the wind and with the area (rpm) and the cube of the 
resistance is 10 ohms. Find of the plane surface. If the diameter. If the shaft of a 
the current if the area of the surface is 40 certain material 3 inches in 
resistance is 12 ohms. square feet surface and the diameter can transmit 45 

wind velocity is 20 miles hp at 100 rpm, what must 
per hour, the resulting the diameter be in order to 
force is 15 pounds. Find transmit 60 hp at 150 rpm? 
the force on a surface of 65 
square feet with a velocity 
of 30 miles per hour. 

60 . The kinetic energy  of a 
moving object varies jointly 
with its mass  and the 
square of its velocity  If 
an object weighing 40 
kilograms with a velocity of 
15 meters per second has 
a kinetic energy of 1000 
joules, find the kinetic 
energy if the velocity is 
increased to 20 meters per 
second. 

Access for free at openstax.org



5 • Chapter Review     519

Chapter Review 
Key Terms 
arrow notation  a way to represent symbolically the local and end behavior of a function by using arrows to indicate 

that an input or output approaches a value 
axis of symmetry  a vertical line drawn through the vertex of a parabola, that opens up or down, around which the 

parabola is symmetric; it is defined by 
coefficient  a nonzero real number multiplied by a variable raised to an exponent 
constant of variation  the non-zero value  that helps define the relationship between variables in direct or inverse 

variation 
continuous function  a function whose graph can be drawn without lifting the pen from the paper because there are 

no breaks in the graph 
degree  the highest power of the variable that occurs in a polynomial 
Descartes’ Rule of Signs  a rule that determines the maximum possible numbers of positive and negative real zeros 

based on the number of sign changes of  and 
direct variation  the relationship between two variables that are a constant multiple of each other; as one quantity 

increases, so does the other 
Division Algorithm  given a polynomial dividend  and a non-zero polynomial divisor  where the degree of 

is less than or equal to the degree of  , there exist unique polynomials  and  such that 
 where  is the quotient and  is the remainder. The remainder is either equal to zero or 

has degree strictly less than 
end behavior  the behavior of the graph of a function as the input decreases without bound and increases without 

bound 
Factor Theorem   is a zero of polynomial function  if and only if  is a factor of 
Fundamental Theorem of Algebra  a polynomial function with degree greater than 0 has at least one complex zero 
general form of a quadratic function  the function that describes a parabola, written in the form , 

where  and  are real numbers and 
global maximum  highest turning point on a graph;  where  for all 
global minimum  lowest turning point on a graph;  where  for all 
horizontal asymptote  a horizontal line  where the graph approaches the line as the inputs increase or decrease 

without bound. 
Intermediate Value Theorem  for two numbers  and  in the domain of  if  and  then the 

function  takes on every value between  and  ; specifically, when a polynomial function changes from a 
negative value to a positive value, the function must cross the  axis 

inverse variation  the relationship between two variables in which the product of the variables is a constant 
inversely proportional  a relationship where one quantity is a constant divided by the other quantity; as one quantity 

increases, the other decreases 
invertible function  any function that has an inverse function 
joint variation  a relationship where a variable varies directly or inversely with multiple variables 
leading coefficient  the coefficient of the leading term 
leading term  the term containing the highest power of the variable 
Linear Factorization Theorem  allowing for multiplicities, a polynomial function will have the same number of factors 

as its degree, and each factor will be in the form  , where  is a complex number 
multiplicity  the number of times a given factor appears in the factored form of the equation of a polynomial; if a 

polynomial contains a factor of the form  ,  is a zero of multiplicity 
polynomial function  a function that consists of either zero or the sum of a finite number of non-zero terms, each of 

which is a product of a number, called the coefficient of the term, and a variable raised to a non-negative integer 
power. 

power function  a function that can be represented in the form  where  is a constant, the base is a 
variable, and the exponent,  , is a constant 

rational function  a function that can be written as the ratio of two polynomials 
Rational Zero Theorem  the possible rational zeros of a polynomial function have the form  where  is a factor of the 

constant term and  is a factor of the leading coefficient. 
Remainder Theorem  if a polynomial  is divided by  , then the remainder is equal to the value 
removable discontinuity  a single point at which a function is undefined that, if filled in, would make the function 

continuous; it appears as a hole on the graph of a function 
roots  in a given function, the values of  at which , also called zeros 



520     5 • Chapter Review

smooth curve  a graph with no sharp corners 
standard form of a quadratic function  the function that describes a parabola, written in the form 

, where  is the vertex 
synthetic division  a shortcut method that can be used to divide a polynomial by a binomial of the form 
term of a polynomial function  any  of a polynomial function in the form 
turning point  the location at which the graph of a function changes direction 
varies directly  a relationship where one quantity is a constant multiplied by the other quantity 
varies inversely  a relationship where one quantity is a constant divided by the other quantity 
vertex  the point at which a parabola changes direction, corresponding to the minimum or maximum value of the 

quadratic function 
vertex form of a quadratic function  another name for the standard form of a quadratic function 
vertical asymptote  a vertical line  where the graph tends toward positive or negative infinity as the inputs 

approach 
zeros  in a given function, the values of  at which , also called roots 

Key Equations 

general form of a quadratic function 

standard form of a quadratic function 

general form of a polynomial function 

Division Algorithm 

Rational Function 

Direct variation  is a nonzero constant. 

Inverse variation  is a nonzero constant. 

Key Concepts 
5.1 Quadratic Functions 

• A polynomial function of degree two is called a quadratic function. 
• The graph of a quadratic function is a parabola. A parabola is a U-shaped curve that can open either up or down. 
• The axis of symmetry is the vertical line passing through the vertex. The zeros, or  intercepts, are the points at 

which the parabola crosses the  axis. The  intercept is the point at which the parabola crosses the  axis. See 
Example 1, Example 7, and Example 8. 

• Quadratic functions are often written in general form. Standard or vertex form is useful to easily identify the vertex 
of a parabola. Either form can be written from a graph. See Example 2. 

• The vertex can be found from an equation representing a quadratic function. See Example 3. 
• The domain of a quadratic function is all real numbers. The range varies with the function. See Example 4. 
• A quadratic function’s minimum or maximum value is given by the  value of the vertex. 
• The minimum or maximum value of a quadratic function can be used to determine the range of the function and to 

solve many kinds of real-world problems, including problems involving area and revenue. See Example 5 and 
Example 6. 

• The vertex and the intercepts can be identified and interpreted to solve real-world problems. See Example 9. 

Access for free at openstax.org



5 • Chapter Review     521

5.2 Power Functions and Polynomial Functions 
• A power function is a variable base raised to a number power. See Example 1. 
• The behavior of a graph as the input decreases beyond bound and increases beyond bound is called the end 

behavior. 
• The end behavior depends on whether the power is even or odd. See Example 2 and Example 3. 
• A polynomial function is the sum of terms, each of which consists of a transformed power function with positive 

whole number power. See Example 4. 
• The degree of a polynomial function is the highest power of the variable that occurs in a polynomial. The term 

containing the highest power of the variable is called the leading term. The coefficient of the leading term is called 
the leading coefficient. See Example 5. 

• The end behavior of a polynomial function is the same as the end behavior of the power function represented by 
the leading term of the function. See Example 6 and Example 7. 

• A polynomial of degree  will have at most  x-intercepts and at most  turning points. See Example 8, Example 
9, Example 10, Example 11, and Example 12. 

5.3 Graphs of Polynomial Functions 
• Polynomial functions of degree 2 or more are smooth, continuous functions. See Example 1. 
• To find the zeros of a polynomial function, if it can be factored, factor the function and set each factor equal to zero. 

See Example 2, Example 3, and Example 4. 
• Another way to find the  intercepts of a polynomial function is to graph the function and identify the points at 

which the graph crosses the  axis. See Example 5. 
• The multiplicity of a zero determines how the graph behaves at the  intercepts. See Example 6. 
• The graph of a polynomial will cross the horizontal axis at a zero with odd multiplicity. 
• The graph of a polynomial will touch the horizontal axis at a zero with even multiplicity. 
• The end behavior of a polynomial function depends on the leading term. 
• The graph of a polynomial function changes direction at its turning points. 
• A polynomial function of degree  has at most  turning points. See Example 7. 
• To graph polynomial functions, find the zeros and their multiplicities, determine the end behavior, and ensure that 

the final graph has at most  turning points. See Example 8 and Example 10. 
• Graphing a polynomial function helps to estimate local and global extremas. See Example 11. 
• The Intermediate Value Theorem tells us that if  have opposite signs, then there exists at least one 

value  between  and  for which  See Example 9. 

5.4 Dividing Polynomials 
• Polynomial long division can be used to divide a polynomial by any polynomial with equal or lower degree. See 

Example 1 and Example 2. 
• The Division Algorithm tells us that a polynomial dividend can be written as the product of the divisor and the 

quotient added to the remainder. 
• Synthetic division is a shortcut that can be used to divide a polynomial by a binomial in the form  See Example 

3, Example 4, and Example 5. 
• Polynomial division can be used to solve application problems, including area and volume. See Example 6. 

5.5 Zeros of Polynomial Functions 
• To find  determine the remainder of the polynomial  when it is divided by  This is known as the 

Remainder Theorem. See Example 1. 
• According to the Factor Theorem,  is a zero of  if and only if  is a factor of  See Example 2. 
• According to the Rational Zero Theorem, each rational zero of a polynomial function with integer coefficients will be 

equal to a factor of the constant term divided by a factor of the leading coefficient. See Example 3 and Example 4. 
• When the leading coefficient is 1, the possible rational zeros are the factors of the constant term. 
• Synthetic division can be used to find the zeros of a polynomial function. See Example 5. 
• According to the Fundamental Theorem, every polynomial function has at least one complex zero. See Example 6. 
• Every polynomial function with degree greater than 0 has at least one complex zero. 
• Allowing for multiplicities, a polynomial function will have the same number of factors as its degree. Each factor will 

be in the form  where  is a complex number. See Example 7. 
• The number of positive real zeros of a polynomial function is either the number of sign changes of the function or 

less than the number of sign changes by an even integer. 
• The number of negative real zeros of a polynomial function is either the number of sign changes of  or less 



522     5 • Exercises

than the number of sign changes by an even integer. See Example 8. 
• Polynomial equations model many real-world scenarios. Solving the equations is easiest done by synthetic division. 

See Example 9. 

5.6 Rational Functions 
• We can use arrow notation to describe local behavior and end behavior of the toolkit functions  and 

 See Example 1. 
• A function that levels off at a horizontal value has a horizontal asymptote. A function can have more than one 

vertical asymptote. See Example 2. 
• Application problems involving rates and concentrations often involve rational functions. See Example 3. 
• The domain of a rational function includes all real numbers except those that cause the denominator to equal zero. 

See Example 4. 
• The vertical asymptotes of a rational function will occur where the denominator of the function is equal to zero and 

the numerator is not zero. See Example 5. 
• A removable discontinuity might occur in the graph of a rational function if an input causes both numerator and 

denominator to be zero. See Example 6. 
• A rational function’s end behavior will mirror that of the ratio of the leading terms of the numerator and 

denominator functions. See Example 7, Example 8, Example 9, and Example 10. 
• Graph rational functions by finding the intercepts, behavior at the intercepts and asymptotes, and end behavior. See 

Example 11. 
• If a rational function has x-intercepts at  vertical asymptotes at  and no 

 then the function can be written in the form 

See Example 12. 

5.7 Inverses and Radical Functions 
• The inverse of a quadratic function is a square root function. 
• If  is the inverse of a function  then  is the inverse of the function  See Example 1. 
• While it is not possible to find an inverse of most polynomial functions, some basic polynomials are invertible. See 

Example 2. 
• To find the inverse of certain functions, we must restrict the function to a domain on which it will be one-to-one. See 

Example 3 and Example 4. 
• When finding the inverse of a radical function, we need a restriction on the domain of the answer. See Example 5 

and Example 7. 
• Inverse and radical and functions can be used to solve application problems. See Example 6 and Example 8. 

5.8 Modeling Using Variation 
• A relationship where one quantity is a constant multiplied by another quantity is called direct variation. See Example 

1. 
• Two variables that are directly proportional to one another will have a constant ratio. 
• A relationship where one quantity is a constant divided by another quantity is called inverse variation. See Example 

2. 
• Two variables that are inversely proportional to one another will have a constant multiple. See Example 3. 
• In many problems, a variable varies directly or inversely with multiple variables. We call this type of relationship joint 

variation. See Example 4. 

Exercises 
Review Exercises 
Quadratic Functions 
For the following exercises, write the quadratic function in standard form. Then give the vertex and axes intercepts. 
Finally, graph the function. 

1 . 2 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



5 • Exercises     523

For the following exercises, find the equation of the quadratic function using the given information. 
3 . The vertex is  and a  4 . The vertex is  and a 

point on the graph is point on the graph is 

For the following exercises, complete the task. 
5 . A rectangular plot of land is to be enclosed by  6 . An object projected from the ground at a 45 degree 

fencing. One side is along a river and so needs no angle with initial velocity of 120 feet per second has 
fence. If the total fencing available is 600 meters, height,  in terms of horizontal distance traveled, 
find the dimensions of the plot to have maximum  given by  Find the 
area. 

maximum height the object attains. 

Power Functions and Polynomial Functions 

For the following exercises, determine if the function is a polynomial function and, if so, give the degree and leading 
coefficient. 

7 .  8 .  9 . 

For the following exercises, determine end behavior of the polynomial function. 

10 .  11 .  12 . 

Graphs of Polynomial Functions 

For the following exercises, find all zeros of the polynomial function, noting multiplicities. 

13 .  14 .  15 . 

For the following exercises, based on the given graph, determine the zeros of the function and note multiplicity. 
16 . 17 . 18 . Use the Intermediate Value 

Theorem to show that at 
least one zero lies between 
2 and 3 for the function 

Dividing Polynomials 

For the following exercises, use long division to find the quotient and remainder. 

19 .  20 . 

For the following exercises, use synthetic division to find the quotient. If the divisor is a factor, then write the factored 
form. 

21 .  22 .  23 . 



524     5 • Exercises

24 . 

Zeros of Polynomial Functions 

For the following exercises, use the Rational Zero Theorem to help you solve the polynomial equation. 

25 .  26 .  27 . 

28 . 

For the following exercises, use Descartes’ Rule of Signs to find the possible number of positive and negative solutions. 

29 .  30 . 

Rational Functions 

For the following exercises, find the intercepts and the vertical and horizontal asymptotes, and then use them to sketch a 
graph of the function. 

31 . 32 .  33 . 

34 . 

For the following exercises, find the slant asymptote. 

35 .  36 . 

Inverses and Radical Functions 

For the following exercises, find the inverse of the function with the domain given. 

37 .  38 .  39 . 

40 .  41 .  42 . 

Modeling Using Variation 

For the following exercises, find the unknown value. 
43 .  varies directly as the  44 .  varies inversely as the  45 .  varies jointly as the cube 

square of  If when square root of  If when of  and as  If when 
 find  if  find  if  and  

find  if  and 
46 .  varies jointly as  and the 

square of  and inversely 
as the cube of  If when 

  and 
 find  if 

 and 

For the following exercises, solve the application problem. 
47 . The weight of an object above the surface of the  48 . The volume  of an ideal gas varies directly with 

earth varies inversely with the square of the the temperature  and inversely with the 
distance from the center of the earth. If a person pressure P. A cylinder contains oxygen at a 
weighs 150 pounds when he is on the surface of temperature of 310 degrees K and a pressure of 
the earth (3,960 miles from center), find the 18 atmospheres in a volume of 120 liters. Find the 
weight of the person if he is 20 miles above the pressure if the volume is decreased to 100 liters 
surface. and the temperature is increased to 320 degrees 

K. 

Access for free at openstax.org



5 • Exercises     525

Practice Test 
Give the degree and leading coefficient of the following polynomial function. 

1 . 

Determine the end behavior of the polynomial function. 

2 . 3 . 

Write the quadratic function in standard form. Determine the vertex and axes intercepts and graph the function. 

4 . 

Given information about the graph of a quadratic function, find its equation. 
5 . Vertex  and point on 

graph 

Solve the following application problem. 
6 . A rectangular field is to be 

enclosed by fencing. In 
addition to the enclosing 
fence, another fence is to 
divide the field into two 
parts, running parallel to 
two sides. If 1,200 feet of 
fencing is available, find the 
maximum area that can be 
enclosed. 

Find all zeros of the following polynomial functions, noting multiplicities. 

7 . 8 . 

Based on the graph, determine the zeros of the function and multiplicities. 
9 . 

Use long division to find the quotient. 

10 . 

Use synthetic division to find the quotient. If the divisor is a factor, write the factored form. 

11 . 12 . 

Use the Rational Zero Theorem to help you find the zeros of the polynomial functions. 

13 . 14 . 



526     5 • Exercises

15 . 16 . 

Given the following information about a polynomial function, find the function. 
17 . It has a double zero at 18 . It has a zero of multiplicity 

 and zeros at 3 at  and another 
and  . Its y-intercept zero at  . It contains 
is the point 

Use Descartes’ Rule of Signs to determine the possible number of positive and negative solutions. 

19 . 

For the following rational functions, find the intercepts and horizontal and vertical asymptotes, and sketch a graph. 

20 . 21 . 

Find the slant asymptote of the rational function. 

22 . 

Find the inverse of the function. 

23 . 24 . 25 . 

Find the unknown value. 
26 .  varies inversely as the 27 .  varies jointly with  and 

square of  and when the cube root of  If when 
  Find  if  and  

find  if  and 

Solve the following application problem. 
28 . The distance a body falls 

varies directly as the 
square of the time it falls. If 
an object falls 64 feet in 2 
seconds, how long will it 
take to fall 256 feet? 

Access for free at openstax.org



6 • Introduction to Exponential and Logarithmic Functions          527

6 EXPONENTIAL AND LOGARITHMIC 
FUNCTIONS 

Electron micrograph of E.Coli bacteria (credit: “Mattosaurus,” Wikimedia Commons) 

Chapter Outline 
6.1 Exponential Functions 
6.2 Graphs of Exponential Functions 
6.3 Logarithmic Functions 
6.4 Graphs of Logarithmic Functions 
6.5 Logarithmic Properties 
6.6 Exponential and Logarithmic Equations 
6.7 Exponential and Logarithmic Models 
6.8 Fitting Exponential Models to Data 

Introduction to Exponential and Logarithmic Functions 
Focus in on a square centimeter of your skin. Look closer. Closer still. If you could look closely enough, you would see 
hundreds of thousands of microscopic organisms. They are bacteria, and they are not only on your skin, but in your 
mouth, nose, and even your intestines. In fact, the bacterial cells in your body at any given moment outnumber your 
own cells. But that is no reason to feel bad about yourself. While some bacteria can cause illness, many are healthy and 
even essential to the body. 
Bacteria commonly reproduce through a process called binary fission, during which one bacterial cell splits into two. 
When conditions are right, bacteria can reproduce very quickly. Unlike humans and other complex organisms, the time 
required to form a new generation of bacteria is often a matter of minutes or hours, as opposed to days or years.1 

For simplicity’s sake, suppose we begin with a culture of one bacterial cell that can divide every hour. Table 1 shows the 
number of bacterial cells at the end of each subsequent hour. We see that the single bacterial cell leads to over one 
thousand bacterial cells in just ten hours! And if we were to extrapolate the table to twenty-four hours, we would have 
over 16 million! 

Hour 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 

Bacteria 1 2 4 8 16 32 64 128 256 512 1024 

Table 1 

1 Todar, PhD, Kenneth. Todar's Online Textbook of Bacteriology. http://textbookofbacteriology.net/growth_3.html. 



528     6 • Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

In this chapter, we will explore exponential functions, which can be used for, among other things, modeling growth 
patterns such as those found in bacteria. We will also investigate logarithmic functions, which are closely related to 
exponential functions. Both types of functions have numerous real-world applications when it comes to modeling and 
interpreting data. 

6.1 Exponential Functions 
Learning Objectives 
In this section, you will: 

Evaluate exponential functions. 
Find the equation of an exponential function. 
Use compound interest formulas. 
Evaluate exponential functions with base  . 

India is the second most populous country in the world with a population of about  billion people in 2021. The 
population is growing at a rate of about  each year2 . If this rate continues, the population of India will exceed 
China’s population by the year  When populations grow rapidly, we often say that the growth is “exponential,” 
meaning that something is growing very rapidly. To a mathematician, however, the term exponential growth has a very 
specific meaning. In this section, we will take a look at exponential functions, which model this kind of rapid growth. 

Identifying Exponential Functions 
When exploring linear growth, we observed a constant rate of change—a constant number by which the output 
increased for each unit increase in input. For example, in the equation  the slope tells us the output 
increases by 3 each time the input increases by 1. The scenario in the India population example is different because we 
have a percent change per unit time (rather than a constant change) in the number of people. 

Defining an Exponential Function 
A study found that the percent of the population who are vegans in the United States doubled from 2009 to 2011. In 
2011, 2.5% of the population was vegan, adhering to a diet that does not include any animal products—no meat, poultry, 
fish, dairy, or eggs. If this rate continues, vegans will make up 10% of the U.S. population in 2015, 40% in 2019, and 80% 
in 2021. 
What exactly does it mean to grow exponentially? What does the word double have in common with percent increase? 
People toss these words around errantly. Are these words used correctly? The words certainly appear frequently in the 
media. 

• Percent change refers to a change based on a percent of the original amount. 
• Exponential growth refers to an increase based on a constant multiplicative rate of change over equal increments 

of time, that is, a percent increase of the original amount over time. 
• Exponential decay refers to a decrease based on a constant multiplicative rate of change over equal increments of 

time, that is, a percent decrease of the original amount over time. 
For us to gain a clear understanding of exponential growth, let us contrast exponential growth with linear growth. We 
will construct two functions. The first function is exponential. We will start with an input of 0, and increase each input by 
1. We will double the corresponding consecutive outputs. The second function is linear. We will start with an input of 0, 
and increase each input by 1. We will add 2 to the corresponding consecutive outputs. See Table 1. 

0 1 0 

1 2 2 

2 4 4 

3 8 6 

Table 1 

2 http://www.worldometers.info/world-population/. Accessed February 24, 2014. 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.1 • Exponential Functions     529

4 16 8 

5 32 10 

6 64 12 

Table 1 

From Table 1 we can infer that for these two functions, exponential growth dwarfs linear growth. 
• Exponential growth refers to the original value from the range increasing by the same percentage over equal 

increments found in the domain. 
• Linear growth refers to the original value from the range increasing by the same amount over equal increments 

found in the domain. 
Apparently, the difference between “the same percentage” and “the same amount” is quite significant. For exponential 
growth, over equal increments, the constant multiplicative rate of change resulted in doubling the output whenever the 
input increased by one. For linear growth, the constant additive rate of change over equal increments resulted in adding 
2 to the output whenever the input was increased by one. 
The general form of the exponential function is  where  is any nonzero number,  is a positive real number 
not equal to 1. 

• If  the function grows at a rate proportional to its size. 
• If  the function decays at a rate proportional to its size. 

Let’s look at the function  from our example. We will create a table (Table 2) to determine the corresponding 
outputs over an interval in the domain from  to 

Table 2 

Let us examine the graph of  by plotting the ordered pairs we observe on the table in Figure 1, and then make a few 
observations. 

Figure 1 
Let’s define the behavior of the graph of the exponential function  and highlight some its key characteristics. 

• the domain is ∞ ∞
• the range is ∞
• as ∞ ∞



530     6 • Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

• as ∞
•  is always increasing, 
• the graph of  will never touch the x-axis because base two raised to any exponent never has the result of zero. 
•  is the horizontal asymptote. 
• the y-intercept is 1. 

Exponential Function 

For any real number  an exponential function is a function with the form 

where 

•  is a non-zero real number called the initial value and 
•  is any positive real number such that 
• The domain of  is all real numbers. 
• The range of  is all positive real numbers if 
• The range of  is all negative real numbers if 
• The y-intercept is  and the horizontal asymptote is 

EXAMPLE 1 

Identifying Exponential Functions 
Which of the following equations are not exponential functions? 

• 
• 
• 
• 

Solution 
By definition, an exponential function has a constant as a base and an independent variable as an exponent. Thus, 

 does not represent an exponential function because the base is an independent variable. In fact,  is 
a power function. 
Recall that the base b of an exponential function is always a positive constant, and  Thus,  does not 
represent an exponential function because the base,  is less than 

 TRY IT #1 Which of the following equations represent exponential functions? 

• 
• 
• 
• 

Evaluating Exponential Functions 
Recall that the base of an exponential function must be a positive real number other than  Why do we limit the base 
to positive values? To ensure that the outputs will be real numbers. Observe what happens if the base is not positive: 

• Let  and  Then  which is not a real number. 

Why do we limit the base to positive values other than  Because base  results in the constant function. Observe what 
happens if the base is 

• Let  Then  for any value of 
To evaluate an exponential function with the form  we simply substitute  with the given value, and calculate 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.1 • Exponential Functions     531

the resulting power. For example: 
Let  What is 

To evaluate an exponential function with a form other than the basic form, it is important to follow the order of 
operations. For example: 
Let  What is 

Note that if the order of operations were not followed, the result would be incorrect: 

EXAMPLE 2 

Evaluating Exponential Functions 
Let  Evaluate  without using a calculator. 

Solution 
Follow the order of operations. Be sure to pay attention to the parentheses. 

 TRY IT #2 Let  Evaluate  using a calculator. Round to four decimal places. 

Defining Exponential Growth 
Because the output of exponential functions increases very rapidly, the term “exponential growth” is often used in 
everyday language to describe anything that grows or increases rapidly. However, exponential growth can be defined 
more precisely in a mathematical sense. If the growth rate is proportional to the amount present, the function models 
exponential growth. 

Exponential Growth 

A function that models exponential growth grows by a rate proportional to the amount present. For any real number 
 and any positive real numbers  and  such that  an exponential growth function has the form 

where 

•  is the initial or starting value of the function. 
•  is the growth factor or growth multiplier per unit  . 

In more general terms, we have an exponential function, in which a constant base is raised to a variable exponent. To 
differentiate between linear and exponential functions, let’s consider two companies, A and B. Company A has 100 stores 
and expands by opening 50 new stores a year, so its growth can be represented by the function 



532     6 • Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

Company B has 100 stores and expands by increasing the number of stores by 50% each year, so its growth can be 
represented by the function 
A few years of growth for these companies are illustrated in Table 3. 

Year, Stores, Company A Stores, Company B 

Table 3 

The graphs comparing the number of stores for each company over a five-year period are shown in Figure 2. We can see 
that, with exponential growth, the number of stores increases much more rapidly than with linear growth. 

Figure 2 The graph shows the numbers of stores Companies A and B opened over a five-year period. 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.1 • Exponential Functions     533

Notice that the domain for both functions is ∞  and the range for both functions is ∞  After year 1, Company B 
always has more stores than Company A. 
Now we will turn our attention to the function representing the number of stores for Company B, 
In this exponential function, 100 represents the initial number of stores, 0.50 represents the growth rate, and 

 represents the growth factor. Generalizing further, we can write this function as  where 
100 is the initial value,  is called the base, and  is called the exponent. 

EXAMPLE 3 

Evaluating a Real-World Exponential Model 
At the beginning of this section, we learned that the population of India was about  billion in the year 2013, with an 
annual growth rate of about  This situation is represented by the growth function  where  is 
the number of years since  To the nearest thousandth, what will the population of India be in 

Solution 
To estimate the population in 2031, we evaluate the models for  because 2031 is  years after 2013. Rounding to 
the nearest thousandth, 

There will be about 1.549 billion people in India in the year 2031. 

 TRY IT #3 The population of China was about 1.39 billion in the year 2013, with an annual growth rate of 
about  This situation is represented by the growth function  where  is 
the number of years since  To the nearest thousandth, what will the population of China be 
for the year 2031? How does this compare to the population prediction we made for India in 
Example 3? 

Finding Equations of Exponential Functions 
In the previous examples, we were given an exponential function, which we then evaluated for a given input. Sometimes 
we are given information about an exponential function without knowing the function explicitly. We must use the 
information to first write the form of the function, then determine the constants  and  and evaluate the function. 

...
HOW TO 

Given two data points, write an exponential model. 

1. If one of the data points has the form  then  is the initial value. Using  substitute the second point into 
the equation  and solve for 

2. If neither of the data points have the form  substitute both points into two equations with the form 
 Solve the resulting system of two equations in two unknowns to find  and 

3. Using the  and  found in the steps above, write the exponential function in the form 

EXAMPLE 4 

Writing an Exponential Model When the Initial Value Is Known 
In 2006, 80 deer were introduced into a wildlife refuge. By 2012, the population had grown to 180 deer. The population 
was growing exponentially. Write an exponential function  representing the population  of deer over time 

Solution 
We let our independent variable  be the number of years after 2006. Thus, the information given in the problem can be 
written as input-output pairs: (0, 80) and (6, 180). Notice that by choosing our input variable to be measured as years 
after 2006, we have given ourselves the initial value for the function,  We can now substitute the second point 
into the equation  to find 



534     6 • Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

NOTE: Unless otherwise stated, do not round any intermediate calculations. Then round the final answer to four places 
for the remainder of this section. 
The exponential model for the population of deer is  (Note that this exponential function models 
short-term growth. As the inputs gets large, the output will get increasingly larger, so much so that the model may not 
be useful in the long term.) 
We can graph our model to observe the population growth of deer in the refuge over time. Notice that the graph in 
Figure 3 passes through the initial points given in the problem,  and  We can also see that the domain for 
the function is ∞  and the range for the function is ∞

Figure 3 Graph showing the population of deer over time,   years after 2006 

 TRY IT #4 A wolf population is growing exponentially. In 2011,  wolves were counted. By  the 
population had reached 236 wolves. What two points can be used to derive an exponential 
equation modeling this situation? Write the equation representing the population  of wolves 
over time 

EXAMPLE 5 

Writing an Exponential Model When the Initial Value is Not Known 
Find an exponential function that passes through the points  and 

Solution 
Because we don’t have the initial value, we substitute both points into an equation of the form  and then 
solve the system for  and 

• Substituting  gives 
• Substituting  gives 

Use the first equation to solve for  in terms of 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.1 • Exponential Functions     535

Substitute  in the second equation, and solve for 

Use the value of  in the first equation to solve for the value of 

Thus, the equation is 
We can graph our model to check our work. Notice that the graph in Figure 4 passes through the initial points given in 
the problem,  and  The graph is an example of an exponential decay function. 

Figure 4 The graph of  models exponential decay. 

 TRY IT #5 Given the two points  and  find the equation of the exponential function that passes 
through these two points. 

 Q&A Do two points always determine a unique exponential function? 

Yes, provided the two points are either both above the x-axis or both below the x-axis and have 
different x-coordinates. But keep in mind that we also need to know that the graph is, in fact, an 
exponential function. Not every graph that looks exponential really is exponential. We need to know 
the graph is based on a model that shows the same percent growth with each unit increase in  which 
in many real world cases involves time. 



536     6 • Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

...
HOW TO 

Given the graph of an exponential function, write its equation. 

1. First, identify two points on the graph. Choose the y-intercept as one of the two points whenever possible. Try to 
choose points that are as far apart as possible to reduce round-off error. 

2. If one of the data points is the y-intercept  , then  is the initial value. Using  substitute the second point 
into the equation  and solve for 

3. If neither of the data points have the form  substitute both points into two equations with the form 
 Solve the resulting system of two equations in two unknowns to find  and 

4. Write the exponential function, 

EXAMPLE 6 

Writing an Exponential Function Given Its Graph 
Find an equation for the exponential function graphed in Figure 5. 

Figure 5 

Solution 
We can choose the y-intercept of the graph,  as our first point. This gives us the initial value,  Next, choose a 
point on the curve some distance away from  that has integer coordinates. One such point is 

Because we restrict ourselves to positive values of  we will use  Substitute  and  into the standard form to yield 
the equation 

 TRY IT #6 Find an equation for the exponential function graphed in Figure 6. 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.1 • Exponential Functions     537

Figure 6 

...
HOW TO 

Given two points on the curve of an exponential function, use a graphing calculator to find the equation. 

1. Press [STAT]. 
2. Clear any existing entries in columns L1 or L2. 
3. In L1, enter the x-coordinates given. 
4. In L2, enter the corresponding y-coordinates. 
5. Press [STAT] again. Cursor right to CALC, scroll down to ExpReg (Exponential Regression), and press [ENTER]. 
6. The screen displays the values of a and b in the exponential equation  . 

EXAMPLE 7 

Using a Graphing Calculator to Find an Exponential Function 
Use a graphing calculator to find the exponential equation that includes the points  and 

Solution 
Follow the guidelines above. First press [STAT], [EDIT], [1: Edit…], and clear the lists L1 and L2. Next, in the L1 column, 
enter the x-coordinates, 2 and 5. Do the same in the L2 column for the y-coordinates, 24.8 and 198.4. 
Now press [STAT], [CALC], [0: ExpReg] and press [ENTER]. The values  and  will be displayed. The 
exponential equation is 

 TRY IT #7 Use a graphing calculator to find the exponential equation that includes the points (3, 75.98) and 
(6, 481.07). 

Applying the Compound-Interest Formula 
Savings instruments in which earnings are continually reinvested, such as mutual funds and retirement accounts, use 
compound interest. The term compounding refers to interest earned not only on the original value, but on the 
accumulated value of the account. 
The annual percentage rate (APR) of an account, also called the nominal rate, is the yearly interest rate earned by an 
investment account. The term nominal is used when the compounding occurs a number of times other than once per 
year. In fact, when interest is compounded more than once a year, the effective interest rate ends up being greater than 
the nominal rate! This is a powerful tool for investing. 



538     6 • Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

We can calculate the compound interest using the compound interest formula, which is an exponential function of the 
variables time  principal  APR  and number of compounding periods in a year 

For example, observe Table 4, which shows the result of investing $1,000 at 10% for one year. Notice how the value of the 
account increases as the compounding frequency increases. 

Frequency Value after 1 year 

Annually $1100 

Semiannually $1102.50 

Quarterly $1103.81 

Monthly $1104.71 

Daily $1105.16 

Table 4 

The Compound Interest Formula 

Compound interest can be calculated using the formula 

where 

•  is the account value, 
•  is measured in years, 
•  is the starting amount of the account, often called the principal, or more generally present value, 
•  is the annual percentage rate (APR) expressed as a decimal, and 
•  is the number of compounding periods in one year. 

EXAMPLE 8 

Calculating Compound Interest 
If we invest $3,000 in an investment account paying 3% interest compounded quarterly, how much will the account be 
worth in 10 years? 

Solution 
Because we are starting with $3,000,  Our interest rate is 3%, so  Because we are compounding 
quarterly, we are compounding 4 times per year, so  We want to know the value of the account in 10 years, so we 
are looking for  the value when 

The account will be worth about $4,045.05 in 10 years. 

 TRY IT #8 An initial investment of $100,000 at 12% interest is compounded weekly (use 52 weeks in a year). 
What will the investment be worth in 30 years? 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.1 • Exponential Functions     539

EXAMPLE 9 

Using the Compound Interest Formula to Solve for the Principal 
A 529 Plan is a college-savings plan that allows relatives to invest money to pay for a child’s future college tuition; the 
account grows tax-free. Lily wants to set up a 529 account for her new granddaughter and wants the account to grow to 
$40,000 over 18 years. She believes the account will earn 6% compounded semi-annually (twice a year). To the nearest 
dollar, how much will Lily need to invest in the account now? 

Solution 
The nominal interest rate is 6%, so  Interest is compounded twice a year, so 
We want to find the initial investment,  needed so that the value of the account will be worth $40,000 in  years. 
Substitute the given values into the compound interest formula, and solve for 

Lily will need to invest $13,801 to have $40,000 in 18 years. 

 TRY IT #9 Refer to Example 9. To the nearest dollar, how much would Lily need to invest if the account is 
compounded quarterly? 

Evaluating Functions with Base e 
As we saw earlier, the amount earned on an account increases as the compounding frequency increases. Table 5 shows 
that the increase from annual to semi-annual compounding is larger than the increase from monthly to daily 
compounding. This might lead us to ask whether this pattern will continue. 
Examine the value of $1 invested at 100% interest for 1 year, compounded at various frequencies, listed in Table 5. 

Frequency Value 

Annually $2 

Semiannually $2.25 

Quarterly $2.441406 

Monthly $2.613035 

Daily $2.714567 

Hourly $2.718127 

Once per minute $2.718279 

Once per second $2.718282 

Table 5 



540     6 • Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

These values appear to be approaching a limit as  increases without bound. In fact, as  gets larger and larger, the 
expression  approaches a number used so frequently in mathematics that it has its own name: the letter  This 
value is an irrational number, which means that its decimal expansion goes on forever without repeating. Its 
approximation to six decimal places is shown below. 

The Number 

The letter e represents the irrational number 

The letter e is used as a base for many real-world exponential models. To work with base e, we use the 
approximation,  The constant was named by the Swiss mathematician Leonhard Euler (1707–1783) who 
first investigated and discovered many of its properties. 

EXAMPLE 10 

Using a Calculator to Find Powers of e 
Calculate  Round to five decimal places. 

Solution 
On a calculator, press the button labeled  The window shows  Type  and then close parenthesis, 
Press [ENTER]. Rounding to  decimal places,  Caution: Many scientific calculators have an “Exp” button, 
which is used to enter numbers in scientific notation. It is not used to find powers of 

 TRY IT #10 Use a calculator to find  Round to five decimal places. 

Investigating Continuous Growth 
So far we have worked with rational bases for exponential functions. For most real-world phenomena, however, e is used 
as the base for exponential functions. Exponential models that use  as the base are called continuous growth or decay 
models. We see these models in finance, computer science, and most of the sciences, such as physics, toxicology, and 
fluid dynamics. 

The Continuous Growth/Decay Formula 

For all real numbers  and all positive numbers  and  continuous growth or decay is represented by the formula 

where 

•  is the initial value, 
•  is the continuous growth rate per unit time, 
• and  is the elapsed time. 

If  , then the formula represents continuous growth. If  , then the formula represents continuous decay. 

For business applications, the continuous growth formula is called the continuous compounding formula and takes 
the form 

where 

•  is the principal or the initial invested, 
•  is the growth or interest rate per unit time, 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.1 • Exponential Functions     541

• and  is the period or term of the investment. 

...
HOW TO 

Given the initial value, rate of growth or decay, and time  solve a continuous growth or decay function. 

1. Use the information in the problem to determine  , the initial value of the function. 
2. Use the information in the problem to determine the growth rate 

a. If the problem refers to continuous growth, then 
b. If the problem refers to continuous decay, then 

3. Use the information in the problem to determine the time 
4. Substitute the given information into the continuous growth formula and solve for 

EXAMPLE 11 

Calculating Continuous Growth 
A person invested $1,000 in an account earning a nominal 10% per year compounded continuously. How much was in 
the account at the end of one year? 

Solution 
Since the account is growing in value, this is a continuous compounding problem with growth rate  The initial 
investment was $1,000, so  We use the continuous compounding formula to find the value after  year: 

The account is worth $1,105.17 after one year. 

 TRY IT #11 A person invests $100,000 at a nominal 12% interest per year compounded continuously. What 
will be the value of the investment in 30 years? 

EXAMPLE 12 

Calculating Continuous Decay 
Radon-222 decays at a continuous rate of 17.3% per day. How much will 100 mg of Radon-222 decay to in 3 days? 

Solution 
Since the substance is decaying, the rate,  , is negative. So,  The initial amount of radon-222 was 

 mg, so  We use the continuous decay formula to find the value after  days: 

So 59.5115 mg of radon-222 will remain. 

 TRY IT #12 Using the data in Example 12, how much radon-222 will remain after one year? 

 MEDIA 

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with exponential functions. 



542     6 • Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

Exponential Growth Function (https://openstax.org/l/expgrowth) 
Compound Interest (https://openstax.org/l/compoundint) 

 6.1 SECTION EXERCISES 
Verbal 

1 . Explain why the values of an  2 . Given a formula for an  3 . The Oxford Dictionary 
increasing exponential exponential function, is it defines the word nominal as 
function will eventually possible to determine a value that is “stated or 
overtake the values of an whether the function grows expressed but not 
increasing linear function. or decays exponentially just necessarily corresponding 

by looking at the formula? exactly to the real value.”3 

Explain. Develop a reasonable 
argument for why the term 
nominal rate is used to 
describe the annual 
percentage rate of an 
investment account that 
compounds interest. 

Algebraic 

For the following exercises, identify whether the statement represents an exponential function. Explain. 
4 . The average annual  5 . A population of bacteria  6 . The value of a coin 

population increase of a decreases by a factor of collection has increased by 
pack of wolves is 25. every  hours.  annually over the last 

 years. 
7 . For each training session, a  8 . The height of a projectile at 

personal trainer charges his time  is represented by the 
clients  less than the function 
previous training session. 

For the following exercises, consider this scenario: For each year  the population of a forest of trees is represented by 
the function  In a neighboring forest, the population of the same type of tree is represented by the 
function  (Round answers to the nearest whole number.) 
9 . Which forest’s population is  10 . Which forest had a greater  11 . Assuming the population 

growing at a faster rate? number of trees initially? growth models continue to 
By how many? represent the growth of 

the forests, which forest 
will have a greater number 
of trees after  years? By 
how many? 

3 Oxford Dictionary. http://oxforddictionaries.com/us/definition/american_english/nomina. 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.1 • Exponential Functions     543

12 . Assuming the population  13 . Discuss the above results 
growth models continue to from the previous four 
represent the growth of exercises. Assuming the 
the forests, which forest population growth models 
will have a greater number continue to represent the 
of trees after  years? By growth of the forests, 
how many? which forest will have the 

greater number of trees in 
the long run? Why? What 
are some factors that 
might influence the long-
term validity of the 
exponential growth model? 

For the following exercises, determine whether the equation represents exponential growth, exponential decay, or 
neither. Explain. 

14 .  15 .  16 . 
17 . 

For the following exercises, find the formula for an exponential function that passes through the two points given. 

18 .  and  19 .  and  20 .  and 

21 .  and  22 .  and 

For the following exercises, determine whether the table could represent a function that is linear, exponential, or neither. 
If it appears to be exponential, find a function that passes through the points. 
23 .  24 . 

1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 

70 40 10 -20 70 49 34.3 24.01 

25 .  26 . 
1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 

80 61 42.9 25.61 10 20 40 80 

27 . 
1 2 3 4 

-3.25 2 7.25 12.5 



544     6 • Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

For the following exercises, use the compound interest formula, 

28 . After a certain number of  29 . What was the initial  30 . How many years had the 
years, the value of an deposit made to the account from the previous 
investment account is account in the previous exercise been 
represented by the exercise? accumulating interest? 
equation 

What is the value of the 
account? 

31 . An account is opened with  32 . How much more would the  33 . Solve the compound 
an initial deposit of $6,500 account in the previous interest formula for the 
and earns  interest exercise have been worth if principal,  . 
compounded semi- the interest were 
annually. What will the compounding weekly? 
account be worth in 
years? 

34 . Use the formula found in  35 . How much more would the  36 . Use properties of rational 
the previous exercise to account in the previous exponents to solve the 
calculate the initial deposit two exercises be worth if it compound interest 
of an account that is worth were earning interest for formula for the interest 

 after earning more years? rate, 
 interest compounded 

monthly for  years. 
(Round to the nearest 
dollar.) 

37 . Use the formula found in  38 . Use the formula found in 
the previous exercise to the previous exercise to 
calculate the interest rate calculate the interest rate 
for an account that was for an account that was 
compounded semi- compounded monthly, had 
annually, had an initial an initial deposit of $5,500, 
deposit of $9,000 and was and was worth $38,455 
worth $13,373.53 after 10 after 30 years. 
years. 

For the following exercises, determine whether the equation represents continuous growth, continuous decay, or 
neither. Explain. 

39 .  40 .  41 . 
42 . Suppose an investment  43 . How much less would the 

account is opened with an account from Exercise 42 
initial deposit of be worth after  years if it 
earning  interest were compounded 
compounded continuously. monthly instead? 
How much will the account 
be worth after  years? 

Numeric 

For the following exercises, evaluate each function. Round answers to four decimal places, if necessary. 

44 .  for  45 .  for  46 .  for 

47 .  for  48 .  49 .  for 
for 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.1 • Exponential Functions     545

50 .  for 

Technology 

For the following exercises, use a graphing calculator to find the equation of an exponential function given the points on 
the curve. 
51 .  and  52 .  and  53 .  and 

54 .  and  55 .  and 

Extensions 

56 . The annual percentage  57 . Repeat the previous  58 . Recall that an exponential 
yield (APY) of an exercise to find the formula function is any equation 
investment account is a for the APY of an account written in the form 
representation of the that compounds daily. Use  such that 
actual interest rate earned the results from this and and  are positive 
on a compounding the previous exercise to numbers and  Any 
account. It is based on a develop a function  for positive number  can be 
compounding period of the APY of any account written as  for 
one year. Show that the that compounds  times some value of  . Use this 
APY of an account that per year. fact to rewrite the formula 
compounds monthly can for an exponential function 
be found with the formula that uses the number  as 

a base. 

59 . In an exponential decay  60 . The formula for the 
function, the base of the amount  in an investment 
exponent is a value account with a nominal 
between 0 and 1. Thus, for interest rate  at any time 
some number  the is given by 
exponential decay function where  is the amount of 
can be written as principal initially deposited 

 Use this into an account that 
formula, along with the compounds continuously. 
fact that  to show Prove that the percentage 
that an exponential decay of interest earned to 
function takes the form principal at any time  can 

 for some be calculated with the 
positive number  . formula 



546     6 • Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

Real-World Applications 

61 . The fox population in a  62 . A scientist begins with 100  63 . In the year 1985, a house 
certain region has an milligrams of a radioactive was valued at $110,000. By 
annual growth rate of 9% substance that decays the year 2005, the value 
per year. In the year 2012, exponentially. After 35 had appreciated to 
there were 23,900 fox hours, 50mg of the $145,000. What was the 
counted in the area. What substance remains. How annual growth rate 
is the fox population many milligrams will between 1985 and 2005? 
predicted to be in the year remain after 54 hours? Assume that the value 
2020? continued to grow by the 

same percentage. What 
was the value of the house 
in the year 2010? 

64 . A car was valued at  65 . Jaylen wants to save  66 . Kyoko has $10,000 that she 
$38,000 in the year 2007. $54,000 for a down wants to invest. Her bank 
By 2013, the value had payment on a home. How has several investment 
depreciated to $11,000 If much will he need to invest accounts to choose from, 
the car’s value continues to in an account with 8.2% all compounding daily. Her 
drop by the same APR, compounding daily, in goal is to have $15,000 by 
percentage, what will it be order to reach his goal in 5 the time she finishes 
worth by 2017? years? graduate school in 6 years. 

To the nearest hundredth 
of a percent, what should 
her minimum annual 
interest rate be in order to 
reach her goal? (Hint: solve 
the compound interest 
formula for the interest 
rate.) 

67 . Alyssa opened a retirement  68 . An investment account 
account with 7.25% APR in with an annual interest 
the year 2000. Her initial rate of 7% was opened 
deposit was $13,500. How with an initial deposit of 
much will the account be $4,000 Compare the values 
worth in 2025 if interest of the account after 9 years 
compounds monthly? How when the interest is 
much more would she compounded annually, 
make if interest quarterly, monthly, and 
compounded continuously. 
continuously? 

6.2 Graphs of Exponential Functions 
Learning Objectives 

Graph exponential functions. 
Graph exponential functions using transformations. 

As we discussed in the previous section, exponential functions are used for many real-world applications such as finance, 
forensics, computer science, and most of the life sciences. Working with an equation that describes a real-world situation 
gives us a method for making predictions. Most of the time, however, the equation itself is not enough. We learn a lot 
about things by seeing their pictorial representations, and that is exactly why graphing exponential equations is a 
powerful tool. It gives us another layer of insight for predicting future events. 

Graphing Exponential Functions 
Before we begin graphing, it is helpful to review the behavior of exponential growth. Recall the table of values for a 
function of the form  whose base is greater than one. We’ll use the function  Observe how the 
output values in Table 1 change as the input increases by 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.2 • Graphs of Exponential Functions     547

Table 1 

Each output value is the product of the previous output and the base,  We call the base  the constant ratio. In fact, for 
any exponential function with the form   is the constant ratio of the function. This means that as the input 
increases by 1, the output value will be the product of the base and the previous output, regardless of the value of 
Notice from the table that 

• the output values are positive for all values of 
• as  increases, the output values increase without bound; and 
• as  decreases, the output values grow smaller, approaching zero. 

Figure 1 shows the exponential growth function 

Figure 1 Notice that the graph gets close to the x-axis, but never touches it. 

The domain of  is all real numbers, the range is ∞  and the horizontal asymptote is 

To get a sense of the behavior of exponential decay, we can create a table of values for a function of the form 
 whose base is between zero and one. We’ll use the function  Observe how the output values in 

Table 2 change as the input increases by 

Table 2 

Again, because the input is increasing by 1, each output value is the product of the previous output and the base, or 
constant ratio 

Notice from the table that 
• the output values are positive for all values of 
• as  increases, the output values grow smaller, approaching zero; and 
• as  decreases, the output values grow without bound. 

Figure 2 shows the exponential decay function, 



548     6 • Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

Figure 2 

The domain of  is all real numbers, the range is ∞  and the horizontal asymptote is 

Characteristics of the Graph of the Parent Function 

An exponential function with the form    has these characteristics: 

• one-to-one function 
• horizontal asymptote: 
• domain: ∞ ∞
• range: ∞
• x-intercept: none 
• y-intercept: 
• increasing if 
• decreasing if 

Figure 3 compares the graphs of exponential growth and decay functions. 

Figure 3 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.2 • Graphs of Exponential Functions     549

...
HOW TO 

Given an exponential function of the form  graph the function. 

1. Create a table of points. 
2. Plot at least  point from the table, including the y-intercept 
3. Draw a smooth curve through the points. 
4. State the domain, ∞ ∞  the range, ∞  and the horizontal asymptote, 

EXAMPLE 1 

Sketching the Graph of an Exponential Function of the Form f(x) = bx 

Sketch a graph of  State the domain, range, and asymptote. 

Solution 
Before graphing, identify the behavior and create a table of points for the graph. 

• Since  is between zero and one, we know the function is decreasing. The left tail of the graph will increase 
without bound, and the right tail will approach the asymptote 

• Create a table of points as in Table 3. 

Table 3 

• Plot the y-intercept,  along with two other points. We can use  and 
Draw a smooth curve connecting the points as in Figure 4. 

Figure 4 

The domain is ∞ ∞  the range is ∞  the horizontal asymptote is 

 TRY IT #1 Sketch the graph of  State the domain, range, and asymptote. 

Graphing Transformations of Exponential Functions 
Transformations of exponential graphs behave similarly to those of other functions. Just as with other parent functions, 
we can apply the four types of transformations—shifts, reflections, stretches, and compressions—to the parent function 

 without loss of shape. For instance, just as the quadratic function maintains its parabolic shape when shifted, 
reflected, stretched, or compressed, the exponential function also maintains its general shape regardless of the 
transformations applied. 



550     6 • Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

Graphing a Vertical Shift 
The first transformation occurs when we add a constant  to the parent function  giving us a vertical shift 
units in the same direction as the sign. For example, if we begin by graphing a parent function,  we can then 
graph two vertical shifts alongside it, using  the upward shift,  and the downward shift, 

 Both vertical shifts are shown in Figure 5. 

Figure 5 
Observe the results of shifting  vertically: 

• The domain, ∞ ∞  remains unchanged. 
• When the function is shifted up  units to 

◦ The y-intercept shifts up  units to 
◦ The asymptote shifts up  units to 
◦ The range becomes ∞

• When the function is shifted down  units to 
◦ The y-intercept shifts down  units to 
◦ The asymptote also shifts down  units to 
◦ The range becomes ∞

Graphing a Horizontal Shift 
The next transformation occurs when we add a constant  to the input of the parent function  giving us a 
horizontal shift  units in the opposite direction of the sign. For example, if we begin by graphing the parent function 

 we can then graph two horizontal shifts alongside it, using  the shift left,  and the shift 
right,  Both horizontal shifts are shown in Figure 6. 

Figure 6 
Observe the results of shifting  horizontally: 

• The domain, ∞ ∞  remains unchanged. 
• The asymptote,  remains unchanged. 
• The y-intercept shifts such that: 

◦ When the function is shifted left  units to  the y-intercept becomes  This is because 
 so the initial value of the function is 

◦ When the function is shifted right  units to  the y-intercept becomes  Again, see that 
 so the initial value of the function is 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.2 • Graphs of Exponential Functions     551

Shifts of the Parent Function f(x) = b x 

For any constants  and  the function  shifts the parent function 

• vertically  units, in the same direction of the sign of 
• horizontally  units, in the opposite direction of the sign of 
• The y-intercept becomes 
• The horizontal asymptote becomes 
• The range becomes ∞
• The domain, ∞ ∞  remains unchanged. 

...
HOW TO 

Given an exponential function with the form  graph the translation. 

1. Draw the horizontal asymptote 
2. Identify the shift as  Shift the graph of  left  units if  is positive, and right  units if  is 

negative. 
3. Shift the graph of  up  units if  is positive, and down  units if  is negative. 
4. State the domain, ∞ ∞  the range, ∞  and the horizontal asymptote 

EXAMPLE 2 

Graphing a Shift of an Exponential Function 
Graph  State the domain, range, and asymptote. 

Solution 
We have an exponential equation of the form  with   and 
Draw the horizontal asymptote  , so draw 
Identify the shift as  so the shift is 
Shift the graph of  left 1 units and down 3 units. 

Figure 7 

The domain is ∞ ∞  the range is ∞  the horizontal asymptote is 

 TRY IT #2 Graph  State domain, range, and asymptote. 



552     6 • Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

...
HOW TO 

Given an equation of the form  for  use a graphing calculator to approximate the solution. 

• Press [Y=]. Enter the given exponential equation in the line headed “Y1=”. 
• Enter the given value for  in the line headed “Y2=”. 
• Press [WINDOW]. Adjust the y-axis so that it includes the value entered for “Y2=”. 
• Press [GRAPH] to observe the graph of the exponential function along with the line for the specified value of 

• To find the value of  we compute the point of intersection. Press [2ND] then [CALC]. Select “intersect” and press 
[ENTER] three times. The point of intersection gives the value of x for the indicated value of the function. 

EXAMPLE 3 

Approximating the Solution of an Exponential Equation 
Solve  graphically. Round to the nearest thousandth. 

Solution 
Press [Y=] and enter  next to Y1=. Then enter 42 next to Y2=. For a window, use the values –3 to 3 for  and 
–5 to 55 for  Press [GRAPH]. The graphs should intersect somewhere near 
For a better approximation, press [2ND] then [CALC]. Select [5: intersect] and press [ENTER] three times. The 
x-coordinate of the point of intersection is displayed as 2.1661943. (Your answer may be different if you use a different 
window or use a different value for Guess?) To the nearest thousandth, 

 TRY IT #3 Solve  graphically. Round to the nearest thousandth. 

Graphing a Stretch or Compression 
While horizontal and vertical shifts involve adding constants to the input or to the function itself, a stretch or 
compression occurs when we multiply the parent function  by a constant  For example, if we begin by 
graphing the parent function  we can then graph the stretch, using  to get  as shown on 
the left in Figure 8, and the compression, using  to get  as shown on the right in Figure 8. 

Figure 8 (a)  stretches the graph of  vertically by a factor of  (b)  compresses the 
graph of  vertically by a factor of 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.2 • Graphs of Exponential Functions     553

Stretches and Compressions of the Parent Function 

For any factor  the function 

• is stretched vertically by a factor of  if 
• is compressed vertically by a factor of  if 
• has a y-intercept of 
• has a horizontal asymptote at  a range of ∞  and a domain of ∞ ∞  which are unchanged from 

the parent function. 

EXAMPLE 4 

Graphing the Stretch of an Exponential Function 

Sketch a graph of  State the domain, range, and asymptote. 

Solution 
Before graphing, identify the behavior and key points on the graph. 

• Since  is between zero and one, the left tail of the graph will increase without bound as  decreases, and the 
right tail will approach the x-axis as  increases. 

• Since  the graph of  will be stretched by a factor of 
• Create a table of points as shown in Table 4. 

Table 4 

• Plot the y-intercept,  along with two other points. We can use  and 
Draw a smooth curve connecting the points, as shown in Figure 9. 

Figure 9 

The domain is ∞ ∞  the range is ∞  the horizontal asymptote is 

 TRY IT #4 Sketch the graph of  State the domain, range, and asymptote. 

Graphing Reflections 
In addition to shifting, compressing, and stretching a graph, we can also reflect it about the x-axis or the y-axis. When we 
multiply the parent function  by  we get a reflection about the x-axis. When we multiply the input by  we 
get a reflection about the y-axis. For example, if we begin by graphing the parent function  we can then graph 
the two reflections alongside it. The reflection about the x-axis,  is shown on the left side of Figure 10, and 



554     6 • Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

the reflection about the y-axis  is shown on the right side of Figure 10. 

Figure 10 (a)  reflects the graph of  about the x-axis. (b)  reflects the graph of 
about the y-axis. 

Reflections of the Parent Function 

The function 

• reflects the parent function  about the x-axis. 
• has a y-intercept of 
• has a range of ∞
• has a horizontal asymptote at  and domain of ∞ ∞  which are unchanged from the parent function. 

The function 

• reflects the parent function  about the y-axis. 
• has a y-intercept of  a horizontal asymptote at  a range of ∞  and a domain of ∞ ∞  which 

are unchanged from the parent function. 

EXAMPLE 5 

Writing and Graphing the Reflection of an Exponential Function 
Find and graph the equation for a function,  that reflects  about the x-axis. State its domain, range, and 
asymptote. 

Solution 
Since we want to reflect the parent function  about the x-axis, we multiply  by  to get, 
Next we create a table of points as in Table 5. 

Table 5 

Plot the y-intercept,  along with two other points. We can use  and 
Draw a smooth curve connecting the points: 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.2 • Graphs of Exponential Functions     555

Figure 11 

The domain is ∞ ∞  the range is ∞  the horizontal asymptote is 

 TRY IT #5 Find and graph the equation for a function,  that reflects  about the y-axis. State 
its domain, range, and asymptote. 

Summarizing Translations of the Exponential Function 
Now that we have worked with each type of translation for the exponential function, we can summarize them in Table 6 
to arrive at the general equation for translating exponential functions. 

Transformations of the Parent Function 

Transformation Form 

Shift 
• Horizontally  units to the left 

• Vertically  units up 

Stretch and Compress 
• Stretch if 

• Compression if 

Reflect about the x-axis 

Reflect about the y-axis 

General equation for all transformations 

Table 6 

Translations of Exponential Functions 

A translation of an exponential function has the form 

6.1 
Where the parent function,   is 

• shifted horizontally  units to the left. 



556     6 • Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

• stretched vertically by a factor of  if 
• compressed vertically by a factor of  if 
• shifted vertically  units. 
• reflected about the x-axis when 

Note the order of the shifts, transformations, and reflections follow the order of operations. 

EXAMPLE 6 

Writing a Function from a Description 

Write the equation for the function described below. Give the horizontal asymptote, the domain, and the range. 
•  is vertically stretched by a factor of  , reflected across the y-axis, and then shifted up  units. 

Solution 
We want to find an equation of the general form  We use the description provided to find    and 

• We are given the parent function  so 
• The function is stretched by a factor of  , so 
• The function is reflected about the y-axis. We replace  with  to get: 
• The graph is shifted vertically 4 units, so 

Substituting in the general form we get, 

The domain is ∞ ∞  the range is ∞  the horizontal asymptote is 

 TRY IT #6 Write the equation for function described below. Give the horizontal asymptote, the domain, and 
the range. 

•  is compressed vertically by a factor of  reflected across the x-axis and then 
shifted down  units. 

 MEDIA 

Access this online resource for additional instruction and practice with graphing exponential functions. 

Graph Exponential Functions (https://openstax.org/l/graphexpfunc) 

 6.2 SECTION EXERCISES 
Verbal 

1 . What role does the  2 . What is the advantage of 
horizontal asymptote of an knowing how to recognize 
exponential function play in transformations of the 
telling us about the end graph of a parent function 
behavior of the graph? algebraically? 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.2 • Graphs of Exponential Functions     557

Algebraic 

3 . The graph of  is  4 . The graph of  5 . The graph of  is 
reflected about the y-axis is reflected about the y-axis reflected about the x-axis 
and stretched vertically by a and compressed vertically and shifted upward  units. 
factor of  What is the by a factor of  What is the What is the equation of the 
equation of the new equation of the new new function,  State its 
function,  State its function,  State its y-intercept, domain, and 
y-intercept, domain, and y-intercept, domain, and range. 
range. range. 

6 . The graph of  7 . The graph of 
is shifted right  units,  is 
stretched vertically by a shifted downward  units, 
factor of  reflected about and then shifted left  units, 
the x-axis, and then shifted stretched vertically by a 
downward  units. What is factor of  and reflected 
the equation of the new about the x-axis. What is the 
function,  State its equation of the new 
y-intercept (to the nearest function,  State its 
thousandth), domain, and y-intercept, domain, and 
range. range. 

Graphical 

For the following exercises, graph the function and its reflection about the y-axis on the same axes, and give the 
y-intercept. 

8 .  9 . 10 . 

For the following exercises, graph each set of functions on the same axes. 

11 . 12 .   and 
 and 

For the following exercises, match each function with one of the graphs in Figure 12. 

Figure 12 
13 .  14 .  15 . 
16 .  17 .  18 . 



558     6 • Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

For the following exercises, use the graphs shown in Figure 13. All have the form 

Figure 13 
19 . Which graph has the  20 . Which graph has the  21 . Which graph has the 

largest value for smallest value for largest value for 
22 . Which graph has the 

smallest value for 

For the following exercises, graph the function and its reflection about the x-axis on the same axes. 

23 . 24 .  25 . 

For the following exercises, graph the transformation of  Give the horizontal asymptote, the domain, and the 
range. 

26 .  27 . 28 . 

For the following exercises, describe the end behavior of the graphs of the functions. 

29 .  30 .  31 . 

For the following exercises, start with the graph of  Then write a function that results from the given 
transformation. 
32 . Shift  4 units upward  33 . Shift  3 units  34 . Shift  2 units left 

downward 
35 . Shift  5 units right  36 . Reflect  about the  37 . Reflect  about the 

x-axis y-axis 

For the following exercises, each graph is a transformation of  Write an equation describing the transformation. 
38 . 39 . 40 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.3 • Logarithmic Functions     559

For the following exercises, find an exponential equation for the graph. 
41 . 42 . 

Numeric 

For the following exercises, evaluate the exponential functions for the indicated value of 

43 .  for  44 .  for  45 .  for 

Technology 

For the following exercises, use a graphing calculator to approximate the solutions of the equation. Round to the nearest 
thousandth. 

46 .  47 .  48 . 

49 .  50 . 

Extensions 

51 . Explore and discuss the graphs of  52 . Prove the conjecture made in the previous 
and  Then make a conjecture about exercise. 
the relationship between the graphs of the 
functions  and  for any real number 

53 . Explore and discuss the graphs of  54 . Prove the conjecture made in the previous 
 and  Then make a exercise. 

conjecture about the relationship between the 
graphs of the functions  and  for any 
real number n and real number 

6.3 Logarithmic Functions 
Learning Objectives 
In this section, you will: 

Convert from logarithmic to exponential form. 
Convert from exponential to logarithmic form. 
Evaluate logarithms. 
Use common logarithms. 
Use natural logarithms. 



560     6 • Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

Figure 1 Devastation of March 11, 2011 earthquake in Honshu, Japan. (credit: Daniel Pierce) 
In 2010, a major earthquake struck Haiti, destroying or damaging over 285,000 homes4 . One year later, another, 
stronger earthquake devastated Honshu, Japan, destroying or damaging over 332,000 buildings,5  like those shown in 
Figure 1. Even though both caused substantial damage, the earthquake in 2011 was 100 times stronger than the 
earthquake in Haiti. How do we know? The magnitudes of earthquakes are measured on a scale known as the Richter 
Scale. The Haitian earthquake registered a 7.0 on the Richter Scale6  whereas the Japanese earthquake registered a 9.0.7 

The Richter Scale is a base-ten logarithmic scale. In other words, an earthquake of magnitude 8 is not twice as great as 
an earthquake of magnitude 4. It is  times as great! In this lesson, we will investigate the nature of 
the Richter Scale and the base-ten function upon which it depends. 

Converting from Logarithmic to Exponential Form 
In order to analyze the magnitude of earthquakes or compare the magnitudes of two different earthquakes, we need to 
be able to convert between logarithmic and exponential form. For example, suppose the amount of energy released 
from one earthquake were 500 times greater than the amount of energy released from another. We want to calculate the 
difference in magnitude. The equation that represents this problem is  where  represents the difference in 
magnitudes on the Richter Scale. How would we solve for 
We have not yet learned a method for solving exponential equations. None of the algebraic tools discussed so far is 
sufficient to solve  We know that  and  so it is clear that  must be some value between 
2 and 3, since  is increasing. We can examine a graph, as in Figure 2, to better estimate the solution. 

4 http://earthquake.usgs.gov/earthquakes/eqinthenews/2010/us2010rja6/#summary. Accessed 3/4/2013. 
5 http://earthquake.usgs.gov/earthquakes/eqinthenews/2011/usc0001xgp/#summary. Accessed 3/4/2013. 
6 http://earthquake.usgs.gov/earthquakes/eqinthenews/2010/us2010rja6/. Accessed 3/4/2013. 
7 http://earthquake.usgs.gov/earthquakes/eqinthenews/2011/usc0001xgp/#details. Accessed 3/4/2013. 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.3 • Logarithmic Functions     561

Figure 2 
Estimating from a graph, however, is imprecise. To find an algebraic solution, we must introduce a new function. Observe 
that the graph in Figure 2 passes the horizontal line test. The exponential function  is one-to-one, so its inverse, 

 is also a function. As is the case with all inverse functions, we simply interchange  and  and solve for  to find 
the inverse function. To represent  as a function of  we use a logarithmic function of the form  The base 
logarithm of a number is the exponent by which we must raise  to get that number. 
We read a logarithmic expression as, “The logarithm with base  of  is equal to  ” or, simplified, “log base  of  is  ” 
We can also say, “  raised to the power of  is  ” because logs are exponents. For example, the base 2 logarithm of 32 
is 5, because 5 is the exponent we must apply to 2 to get 32. Since  we can write  We read this as “log 
base 2 of 32 is 5.” 
We can express the relationship between logarithmic form and its corresponding exponential form as follows: 

Note that the base  is always positive. 

Because logarithm is a function, it is most correctly written as  using parentheses to denote function evaluation, 
just as we would with  However, when the input is a single variable or number, it is common to see the parentheses 
dropped and the expression written without parentheses, as  Note that many calculators require parentheses 
around the 
We can illustrate the notation of logarithms as follows: 

Notice that, comparing the logarithm function and the exponential function, the input and the output are switched. This 
means  and  are inverse functions. 

Definition of the Logarithmic Function 

A logarithm base  of a positive number  satisfies the following definition. 



562     6 • Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

For 

where, 

• we read  as, “the logarithm with base  of  ” or the “log base  of 
• the logarithm  is the exponent to which  must be raised to get 

Also, since the logarithmic and exponential functions switch the  and  values, the domain and range of the 
exponential function are interchanged for the logarithmic function. Therefore, 

• the domain of the logarithm function with base ∞
• the range of the logarithm function with base ∞ ∞

 Q&A Can we take the logarithm of a negative number? 

No. Because the base of an exponential function is always positive, no power of that base can ever be 
negative. We can never take the logarithm of a negative number. Also, we cannot take the logarithm of 
zero. Calculators may output a log of a negative number when in complex mode, but the log of a 
negative number is not a real number. 

...
HOW TO 

Given an equation in logarithmic form  convert it to exponential form. 

1. Examine the equation  and identify 
2. Rewrite  as 

EXAMPLE 1 

Converting from Logarithmic Form to Exponential Form 
Write the following logarithmic equations in exponential form. 

ⓐ   ⓑ  
Solution 

First, identify the values of  Then, write the equation in the form 

ⓐ  

Here,  Therefore, the equation  is equivalent to 

ⓑ  
Here,  Therefore, the equation  is equivalent to 

 TRY IT #1 Write the following logarithmic equations in exponential form. 

ⓐ  ⓑ
Converting from Exponential to Logarithmic Form 
To convert from exponents to logarithms, we follow the same steps in reverse. We identify the base  exponent  and 
output  Then we write 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.3 • Logarithmic Functions     563

EXAMPLE 2 

Converting from Exponential Form to Logarithmic Form 
Write the following exponential equations in logarithmic form. 

a. 
b. 
c. 

Solution 
First, identify the values of  Then, write the equation in the form 

a. 
Here,   and  Therefore, the equation  is equivalent to 

b. 
Here,   and  Therefore, the equation  is equivalent to 

c. 
Here,   and  Therefore, the equation  is equivalent to 

 TRY IT #2 Write the following exponential equations in logarithmic form. 

ⓐ   ⓑ   ⓒ  

Evaluating Logarithms 
Knowing the squares, cubes, and roots of numbers allows us to evaluate many logarithms mentally. For example, 
consider  We ask, “To what exponent must  be raised in order to get 8?” Because we already know  it 
follows that 

Now consider solving  and  mentally. 

• We ask, “To what exponent must 7 be raised in order to get 49?” We know  Therefore, 
• We ask, “To what exponent must 3 be raised in order to get 27?” We know  Therefore, 

Even some seemingly more complicated logarithms can be evaluated without a calculator. For example, let’s evaluate 
 mentally. 

• We ask, “To what exponent must  be raised in order to get  ” We know  and  so 
Therefore, 

...
HOW TO 

Given a logarithm of the form  evaluate it mentally. 

1. Rewrite the argument  as a power of  
2. Use previous knowledge of powers of  identify  by asking, “To what exponent should  be raised in order to get 

 ” 

EXAMPLE 3 

Solving Logarithms Mentally 
Solve  without using a calculator. 



564     6 • Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

Solution 
First we rewrite the logarithm in exponential form:  Next, we ask, “To what exponent must 4 be raised in order to 
get 64?” 
We know 

Therefore, 

 TRY IT #3 Solve  without using a calculator. 

EXAMPLE 4 

Evaluating the Logarithm of a Reciprocal 
Evaluate  without using a calculator. 

Solution 
First we rewrite the logarithm in exponential form:  Next, we ask, “To what exponent must 3 be raised in order 
to get  ” 

We know  but what must we do to get the reciprocal,  Recall from working with exponents that 
We use this information to write 

Therefore, 

 TRY IT #4 Evaluate  without using a calculator. 

Using Common Logarithms 
Sometimes you may see a logarithm written without a base. When you see one written this way, you need to look at the 
expression before evaluating it. It may be that the base you use doesn't matter. If you find it in computer science, it often 
means . However, in mathematics it almost always means the common logarithm of 10. In other words, the 
expression  often means 

Definition of the Common Logarithm 

A common logarithm is a logarithm with base  We can also write  simply as  The common 
logarithm of a positive number  satisfies the following definition. 

For 

We read  as, “the logarithm with base  of  ” or “log base 10 of  ” 

The logarithm  is the exponent to which  must be raised to get 

Currently, we use  as the common logarithm,  as the binary logarithm, and  as the natural 
logarithm. Writing  without specifying a base is now considered bad form, despite being frequently found in older 
materials. 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.3 • Logarithmic Functions     565

...
HOW TO 

Given a common logarithm of the form  evaluate it mentally. 

1. Rewrite the argument  as a power of  
2. Use previous knowledge of powers of  to identify  by asking, “To what exponent must  be raised in order to 

get  ” 

EXAMPLE 5 

Finding the Value of a Common Logarithm Mentally 
Evaluate  without using a calculator. 

Solution 
First we rewrite the logarithm in exponential form:  Next, we ask, “To what exponent must  be raised in 
order to get 1000?” We know 

Therefore, 

 TRY IT #5 Evaluate 

...
HOW TO 

Given a common logarithm with the form  evaluate it using a calculator. 

1. Press [LOG]. 
2. Enter the value given for  followed by [ ) ]. 
3. Press [ENTER]. 

EXAMPLE 6 

Finding the Value of a Common Logarithm Using a Calculator 
Evaluate  to four decimal places using a calculator. 

Solution 
• Press [LOG]. 
• Enter 321, followed by [ ) ]. 
• Press [ENTER]. 

Rounding to four decimal places, 

Analysis 
Note that  and that  Since 321 is between 100 and 1000, we know that  must be between 

 and  This gives us the following: 

 TRY IT #6 Evaluate  to four decimal places using a calculator. 



566     6 • Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

EXAMPLE 7 

Rewriting and Solving a Real-World Exponential Model 
The amount of energy released from one earthquake was 500 times greater than the amount of energy released from 
another. The equation  represents this situation, where  is the difference in magnitudes on the Richter Scale. 
To the nearest thousandth, what was the difference in magnitudes? 

Solution 
We begin by rewriting the exponential equation in logarithmic form. 

Next we evaluate the logarithm using a calculator: 
• Press [LOG]. 
• Enter  followed by [ ) ]. 
• Press [ENTER]. 
• To the nearest thousandth, 

The difference in magnitudes was about 

 TRY IT #7 The amount of energy released from one earthquake was  times greater than the amount of 
energy released from another. The equation  represents this situation, where  is the 
difference in magnitudes on the Richter Scale. To the nearest thousandth, what was the difference 
in magnitudes? 

Using Natural Logarithms 
The most frequently used base for logarithms is  the value of which is approximately . Base  logarithms are 
important in calculus and some scientific applications; they are called natural logarithms. The base  logarithm, 

 has its own notation, 

Most values of  can be found only using a calculator. The major exception is that, because the logarithm of 1 is 
always 0 in any base,  For other natural logarithms, we can use the  key that can be found on most scientific 
calculators. We can also find the natural logarithm of any power of  using the inverse property of logarithms. 

Definition of the Natural Logarithm 

A natural logarithm is a logarithm with base  We write  simply as  The natural logarithm of a positive 
number  satisfies the following definition. 

For 

We read  as, “the logarithm with base  of ” or “the natural logarithm of ” 

The logarithm  is the exponent to which  must be raised to get 

Since the functions  and  are inverse functions,  for all  and  for 

...
HOW TO 

Given a natural logarithm with the form  evaluate it using a calculator. 

1. Press [LN]. 
2. Enter the value given for  followed by [ ) ]. 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.3 • Logarithmic Functions     567

3. Press [ENTER]. 

EXAMPLE 8 

Evaluating a Natural Logarithm Using a Calculator 
Evaluate  to four decimal places using a calculator. 

Solution 
• Press [LN]. 
• Enter  followed by [ ) ]. 
• Press [ENTER]. 

Rounding to four decimal places, 

 TRY IT #8 Evaluate 

 MEDIA 

Access this online resource for additional instruction and practice with logarithms. 

Introduction to Logarithms (https://openstax.org/l/intrologarithms) 

 6.3 SECTION EXERCISES 
Verbal 

1 . What is a base  logarithm?  2 . How is the logarithmic  3 . How can the logarithmic 
Discuss the meaning by function equation  be 
interpreting each part of the related to the exponential solved for  using the 
equivalent equations function  What is properties of exponents? 
and  for the result of composing 

these two functions? 
4 . Discuss the meaning of the  5 . Discuss the meaning of the 

common logarithm. What is natural logarithm. What is 
its relationship to a its relationship to a 
logarithm with base  and logarithm with base  and 
how does the notation how does the notation 
differ? differ? 

Algebraic 

For the following exercises, rewrite each equation in exponential form. 
6 .  7 .  8 . 

9 .  10 .  11 . 

12 .  13 .  14 . 

15 . 

For the following exercises, rewrite each equation in logarithmic form. 
16 .  17 .  18 . 

19 .  20 .  21 . 



568     6 • Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

22 .  23 .  24 . 

25 . 

For the following exercises, solve for  by converting the logarithmic equation to exponential form. 
26 .  27 .  28 . 

29 .  30 .  31 . 

32 . 33 .  34 . 

35 . 

For the following exercises, use the definition of common and natural logarithms to simplify. 

36 .  37 .  38 . 

39 .  40 .  41 . 

Numeric 

For the following exercises, evaluate the base  logarithmic expression without using a calculator. 

42 .  43 .  44 . 

45 . 

For the following exercises, evaluate the common logarithmic expression without using a calculator. 
46 .  47 .  48 . 

49 . 

For the following exercises, evaluate the natural logarithmic expression without using a calculator. 

50 .  51 .  52 . 

53 . 

Technology 

For the following exercises, evaluate each expression using a calculator. Round to the nearest thousandth. 

54 .  55 .  56 . 

57 .  58 . 

Extensions 

59 . Is  in the domain of  60 . Is  in the range of  61 . Is there a number  such 
the function the function that  If so, what is 

 If so, what  If so, for that number? Verify the 
is the value of the function what value of  Verify the result. 
when  Verify the result. 
result. 

62 . Is the following true:  63 . Is the following true: 
 Verify the 

 Verify 
result. the result. 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.4 • Graphs of Logarithmic Functions     569

Real-World Applications 

64 . The exposure index  for  65 . Refer to the previous  66 . The intensity levels I of two 
a camera is a exercise. Suppose the light earthquakes measured on 
measurement of the meter on a camera a seismograph can be 
amount of light that hits indicates an  of  and compared by the formula 
the image receptor. It is the desired exposure time  where 
determined by the is 16 seconds. What should 
equation the f-stop setting be?  is the magnitude given 

by the Richter Scale. In 
 where August 2009, an 

earthquake of magnitude 
 is the “f-stop” setting on 6.1 hit Honshu, Japan. In 

the camera, and  is the March 2011, that same 
exposure time in seconds. region experienced yet 
Suppose the f-stop setting another, more devastating 
is  and the desired earthquake, this time with 
exposure time is a magnitude of 9.0.8  How 
seconds. What will the many times greater was 
resulting exposure index the intensity of the 2011 
be? earthquake? Round to the 

nearest whole number. 

6.4 Graphs of Logarithmic Functions 
Learning Objectives 
In this section, you will: 

Identify the domain of a logarithmic function. 
Graph logarithmic functions. 

In Graphs of Exponential Functions, we saw how creating a graphical representation of an exponential model gives us 
another layer of insight for predicting future events. How do logarithmic graphs give us insight into situations? Because 
every logarithmic function is the inverse function of an exponential function, we can think of every output on a 
logarithmic graph as the input for the corresponding inverse exponential equation. In other words, logarithms give the 
cause for an effect. 
To illustrate, suppose we invest  in an account that offers an annual interest rate of  compounded continuously. 
We already know that the balance in our account for any year  can be found with the equation 
But what if we wanted to know the year for any balance? We would need to create a corresponding new function by 
interchanging the input and the output; thus we would need to create a logarithmic model for this situation. By graphing 
the model, we can see the output (year) for any input (account balance). For instance, what if we wanted to know how 
many years it would take for our initial investment to double? Figure 1 shows this point on the logarithmic graph. 

8 http://earthquake.usgs.gov/earthquakes/world/historical.php. Accessed 3/4/2014. 



570     6 • Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

Figure 1 
In this section we will discuss the values for which a logarithmic function is defined, and then turn our attention to 
graphing the family of logarithmic functions. 

Finding the Domain of a Logarithmic Function 
Before working with graphs, we will take a look at the domain (the set of input values) for which the logarithmic function 
is defined. 
Recall that the exponential function is defined as  for any real number  and constant   where 

• The domain of  is ∞ ∞
• The range of  is ∞

In the last section we learned that the logarithmic function  is the inverse of the exponential function 
So, as inverse functions: 

• The domain of  is the range of  ∞
• The range of  is the domain of  ∞ ∞

Transformations of the parent function  behave similarly to those of other functions. Just as with other 
parent functions, we can apply the four types of transformations—shifts, stretches, compressions, and reflections. 
In Graphs of Exponential Functions we saw that certain transformations can change the range of  Similarly, 
applying transformations to the parent function  can change the domain. When finding the domain of a 
logarithmic function, therefore, it is important to remember that the domain consists only of positive real numbers. That 
is, the argument of the logarithmic function must be greater than zero. 
For example, consider  This function is defined for any values of  such that the argument, in this 
case  is greater than zero. To find the domain, we set up an inequality and solve for 

In interval notation, the domain of  is ∞
...

HOW TO 

Given a logarithmic function, identify the domain. 

1. Set up an inequality showing the argument greater than zero. 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.4 • Graphs of Logarithmic Functions     571

2. Solve for 
3. Write the domain in interval notation. 

EXAMPLE 1 

Identifying the Domain of a Logarithmic Shift 
What is the domain of 

Solution 
The logarithmic function is defined only when the input is positive, so this function is defined when  Solving 
this inequality, 

The domain of  is ∞

 TRY IT #1 What is the domain of 

EXAMPLE 2 

Identifying the Domain of a Logarithmic Shift and Reflection 
What is the domain of 

Solution 
The logarithmic function is defined only when the input is positive, so this function is defined when  Solving 
this inequality, 

The domain of  is ∞

 TRY IT #2 What is the domain of 

Graphing Logarithmic Functions 
Now that we have a feel for the set of values for which a logarithmic function is defined, we move on to graphing 
logarithmic functions. The family of logarithmic functions includes the parent function  along with all its 
transformations: shifts, stretches, compressions, and reflections. 
We begin with the parent function  Because every logarithmic function of this form is the inverse of an 
exponential function with the form  their graphs will be reflections of each other across the line  To 
illustrate this, we can observe the relationship between the input and output values of  and its equivalent 

 in Table 1. 



572     6 • Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

Table 1 

Using the inputs and outputs from Table 1, we can build another table to observe the relationship between points on the 
graphs of the inverse functions  and  See Table 2. 

Table 2 

As we’d expect, the x- and y-coordinates are reversed for the inverse functions. Figure 2 shows the graph of  and 

Figure 2 Notice that the graphs of  and  are reflections about the line 

Observe the following from the graph: 
•  has a y-intercept at  and  has an x- intercept at 
• The domain of  ∞ ∞  is the same as the range of 

• The range of  ∞  is the same as the domain of 

Characteristics of the Graph of the Parent Function, 

For any real number  and constant   we can see the following characteristics in the graph of 

• one-to-one function 
• vertical asymptote: 
• domain: ∞
• range: ∞ ∞

Access for free at openstax.org



6.4 • Graphs of Logarithmic Functions     573

• x-intercept:  and key point 
• y-intercept: none 
• increasing if 
• decreasing if 

See Figure 3. 

Figure 3 

Figure 4 shows how changing the base  in  can affect the graphs. Observe that the graphs compress 
vertically as the value of the base increases. (Note: recall that the function  has base 

Figure 4 The graphs of three logarithmic functions with different bases, all greater than 1. 

...
HOW TO 

Given a logarithmic function with the form  graph the function. 

1. Draw and label the vertical asymptote, 
2. Plot the x-intercept, 
3. Plot the key point 
4. Draw a smooth curve through the points. 
5. State the domain, ∞  the range, ∞ ∞  and the vertical asymptote, 



574     6 • Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

EXAMPLE 3 

Graphing a Logarithmic Function with the Form f(x) = logb(x). 
Graph  State the domain, range, and asymptote. 

Solution 
Before graphing, identify the behavior and key points for the graph. 

• Since  is greater than one, we know the function is increasing. The left tail of the graph will approach the 
vertical asymptote  and the right tail will increase slowly without bound. 

• The x-intercept is 
• The key point  is on the graph. 
• We draw and label the asymptote, plot and label the points, and draw a smooth curve through the points (see 

Figure 5). 

Figure 5 

The domain is ∞  the range is ∞ ∞  and the vertical asymptote is 

 TRY IT #3 Graph  State the domain, range, and asymptote. 

Graphing Transformations of Logarithmic Functions 
As we mentioned in the beginning of the section, transformations of logarithmic graphs behave similarly to those of 
other parent functions. We can shift, stretch, compress, and reflect the parent function  without loss of 
shape. 

Graphing a Horizontal Shift of f(x) = logb(x) 
When a constant  is added to the input of the parent function  the result is a horizontal shift  units in 
the opposite direction of the sign on  To visualize horizontal shifts, we can observe the general graph of the parent 
function  and for  alongside the shift left,  and the shift right, 

 See Figure 6. 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.4 • Graphs of Logarithmic Functions     575

Figure 6 

Horizontal Shifts of the Parent Function 

For any constant  the function 

• shifts the parent function  left  units if 
• shifts the parent function  right  units if 
• has the vertical asymptote 
• has domain ∞
• has range ∞ ∞

...
HOW TO 

Given a logarithmic function with the form  graph the translation. 

1. Identify the horizontal shift: 
a. If  shift the graph of  left  units. 
b. If  shift the graph of  right  units. 

2. Draw the vertical asymptote 
3. Identify three key points from the parent function. Find new coordinates for the shifted functions by subtracting 

from the  coordinate. 
4. Label the three points. 
5. The Domain is ∞  the range is ∞ ∞  and the vertical asymptote is 



576     6 • Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

EXAMPLE 4 

Graphing a Horizontal Shift of the Parent Function y = logb(x) 
Sketch the horizontal shift  alongside its parent function. Include the key points and asymptotes on 
the graph. State the domain, range, and asymptote. 

Solution 
Since the function is  we notice 

Thus  so  This means we will shift the function  right 2 units. 

The vertical asymptote is  or 

Consider the three key points from the parent function,   and 

The new coordinates are found by adding 2 to the  coordinates. 

Label the points   and 

The domain is ∞  the range is ∞ ∞  and the vertical asymptote is 

Figure 7 

 TRY IT #4 Sketch a graph of  alongside its parent function. Include the key points and 
asymptotes on the graph. State the domain, range, and asymptote. 

Graphing a Vertical Shift of y = logb(x) 
When a constant  is added to the parent function  the result is a vertical shift  units in the direction of 
the sign on  To visualize vertical shifts, we can observe the general graph of the parent function 
alongside the shift up,  and the shift down,  See Figure 8. 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.4 • Graphs of Logarithmic Functions     577

Figure 8 

Vertical Shifts of the Parent Function 

For any constant  the function 

• shifts the parent function  up  units if 
• shifts the parent function  down  units if 
• has the vertical asymptote 
• has domain ∞
• has range ∞ ∞

...
HOW TO 

Given a logarithmic function with the form  graph the translation. 

1. Identify the vertical shift: 
◦ If  shift the graph of  up  units. 
◦ If  shift the graph of  down  units. 

2. Draw the vertical asymptote 
3. Identify three key points from the parent function. Find new coordinates for the shifted functions by adding  to 

the  coordinate. 



578     6 • Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

4. Label the three points. 
5. The domain is ∞  the range is ∞ ∞  and the vertical asymptote is 

EXAMPLE 5 

Graphing a Vertical Shift of the Parent Function y = logb(x) 
Sketch a graph of  alongside its parent function. Include the key points and asymptote on the graph. 
State the domain, range, and asymptote. 

Solution 
Since the function is  we will notice  Thus 

This means we will shift the function  down 2 units. 

The vertical asymptote is 

Consider the three key points from the parent function,   and 

The new coordinates are found by subtracting 2 from the y coordinates. 

Label the points   and 

The domain is ∞  the range is ∞ ∞  and the vertical asymptote is 

Figure 9 

The domain is ∞  the range is ∞ ∞  and the vertical asymptote is 

 TRY IT #5 Sketch a graph of  alongside its parent function. Include the key points and 
asymptote on the graph. State the domain, range, and asymptote. 

Graphing Stretches and Compressions of y = logb(x) 
When the parent function  is multiplied by a constant  the result is a vertical stretch or compression 
of the original graph. To visualize stretches and compressions, we set  and observe the general graph of the parent 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.4 • Graphs of Logarithmic Functions     579

function  alongside the vertical stretch,  and the vertical compression, 
See Figure 10. 

Figure 10 

Vertical Stretches and Compressions of the Parent Function 

For any constant  the function 

• stretches the parent function  vertically by a factor of  if 
• compresses the parent function  vertically by a factor of  if 
• has the vertical asymptote 
• has the x-intercept 
• has domain ∞
• has range ∞ ∞

...
HOW TO 

Given a logarithmic function with the form   graph the translation. 

1. Identify the vertical stretch or compressions: 
◦ If  the graph of  is stretched by a factor of  units. 
◦ If  the graph of  is compressed by a factor of  units. 



580     6 • Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

2. Draw the vertical asymptote 
3. Identify three key points from the parent function. Find new coordinates for the shifted functions by multiplying 

the  coordinates by 
4. Label the three points. 
5. The domain is ∞  the range is ∞ ∞  and the vertical asymptote is 

EXAMPLE 6 

Graphing a Stretch or Compression of the Parent Function y = logb(x) 
Sketch a graph of  alongside its parent function. Include the key points and asymptote on the graph. 
State the domain, range, and asymptote. 

Solution 
Since the function is  we will notice 

This means we will stretch the function  by a factor of 2. 

The vertical asymptote is 

Consider the three key points from the parent function,   and 

The new coordinates are found by multiplying the  coordinates by 2. 

Label the points   and 

The domain is ∞  the range is ∞ ∞  and the vertical asymptote is  See Figure 11. 

Figure 11 

The domain is ∞  the range is ∞ ∞  and the vertical asymptote is 

 TRY IT #6 Sketch a graph of  alongside its parent function. Include the key points and 
asymptote on the graph. State the domain, range, and asymptote. 

EXAMPLE 7 

Combining a Shift and a Stretch 
Sketch a graph of  State the domain, range, and asymptote. 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.4 • Graphs of Logarithmic Functions     581

Solution 
Remember: what happens inside parentheses happens first. First, we move the graph left 2 units, then stretch the 
function vertically by a factor of 5, as in Figure 12. The vertical asymptote will be shifted to  The x-intercept will be 

 The domain will be ∞  Two points will help give the shape of the graph:  and  We chose 
 as the x-coordinate of one point to graph because when   the base of the common logarithm. 

Figure 12 

The domain is ∞  the range is ∞ ∞  and the vertical asymptote is 

 TRY IT #7 Sketch a graph of the function  State the domain, range, and asymptote. 

Graphing Reflections of f(x) = logb(x) 
When the parent function  is multiplied by  the result is a reflection about the x-axis. When the input is 
multiplied by  the result is a reflection about the y-axis. To visualize reflections, we restrict  and observe the 
general graph of the parent function  alongside the reflection about the x-axis,  and the 
reflection about the y-axis, 



582     6 • Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

Figure 13 

Reflections of the Parent Function 

The function 

• reflects the parent function  about the x-axis. 
• has domain, ∞  range, ∞ ∞  and vertical asymptote,  which are unchanged from the parent 

function. 

The function 

• reflects the parent function  about the y-axis. 
• has domain ∞
• has range, ∞ ∞  and vertical asymptote,  which are unchanged from the parent function. 

...
HOW TO 

Given a logarithmic function with the parent function  graph a translation. 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.4 • Graphs of Logarithmic Functions     583

1. Draw the vertical asymptote, 1. Draw the vertical asymptote, 

2. Plot the x-intercept, 2. Plot the x-intercept, 

3. Reflect the graph of the parent function 3. Reflect the graph of the parent function 
 about the x-axis.  about the y-axis. 

4. Draw a smooth curve through the points. 4. Draw a smooth curve through the points. 

5. State the domain, (0, ∞), the range, (−∞, ∞), and the 5. State the domain, (−∞, 0) the range, (−∞, ∞) and the 
vertical asymptote . vertical asymptote 

Table 3 

EXAMPLE 8 

Graphing a Reflection of a Logarithmic Function 
Sketch a graph of  alongside its parent function. Include the key points and asymptote on the graph. 
State the domain, range, and asymptote. 

Solution 
Before graphing  identify the behavior and key points for the graph. 

• Since  is greater than one, we know that the parent function is increasing. Since the input value is multiplied 
by   is a reflection of the parent graph about the y-axis. Thus,  will be decreasing as  moves 
from negative infinity to zero, and the right tail of the graph will approach the vertical asymptote 

• The x-intercept is 
• We draw and label the asymptote, plot and label the points, and draw a smooth curve through the points. 

Figure 14 

The domain is ∞  the range is ∞ ∞  and the vertical asymptote is 

 TRY IT #8 Graph  State the domain, range, and asymptote. 



584     6 • Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

...
HOW TO 

Given a logarithmic equation, use a graphing calculator to approximate solutions. 

1. Press [Y=]. Enter the given logarithm equation or equations as Y1= and, if needed, Y2=. 
2. Press [GRAPH] to observe the graphs of the curves and use [WINDOW] to find an appropriate view of the graphs, 

including their point(s) of intersection. 
3. To find the value of  we compute the point of intersection. Press [2ND] then [CALC]. Select “intersect” and press 

[ENTER] three times. The point of intersection gives the value of  for the point(s) of intersection. 

EXAMPLE 9 

Approximating the Solution of a Logarithmic Equation 
Solve  graphically. Round to the nearest thousandth. 

Solution 
Press [Y=] and enter  next to Y1=. Then enter  next to Y2=. For a window, use the values 0 to 5 for 

 and –10 to 10 for  Press [GRAPH]. The graphs should intersect somewhere a little to right of 
For a better approximation, press [2ND] then [CALC]. Select [5: intersect] and press [ENTER] three times. The 
x-coordinate of the point of intersection is displayed as 1.3385297. (Your answer may be different if you use a different 
window or use a different value for Guess?) So, to the nearest thousandth, 

 TRY IT #9 Solve  graphically. Round to the nearest thousandth. 

Summarizing Translations of the Logarithmic Function 
Now that we have worked with each type of translation for the logarithmic function, we can summarize each in Table 4 to 
arrive at the general equation for translating exponential functions. 

Transformations of the Parent Function 

Transformation Form 

Shift 
• Horizontally  units to the left 

• Vertically  units up 

Stretch and Compress 
• Stretch if 

• Compression if 

Reflect about the x-axis 

Reflect about the y-axis 

General equation for all translations 

Table 4 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.4 • Graphs of Logarithmic Functions     585

Transformations of Logarithmic Functions 

All transformations of the parent logarithmic function,  have the form 

where the parent function,  is 

• shifted vertically up  units. 
• shifted horizontally to the left  units. 
• stretched vertically by a factor of  if 
• compressed vertically by a factor of  if 
• reflected about the x-axis when 

For  the graph of the parent function is reflected about the y-axis. 

EXAMPLE 10 

Finding the Vertical Asymptote of a Logarithm Graph 
What is the vertical asymptote of 

Solution 
The vertical asymptote is at 

Analysis 
The coefficient, the base, and the upward translation do not affect the asymptote. The shift of the curve 4 units to the left 
shifts the vertical asymptote to 

 TRY IT #10 What is the vertical asymptote of 

EXAMPLE 11 

Finding the Equation from a Graph 
Find a possible equation for the common logarithmic function graphed in Figure 15. 

Figure 15 

Solution 
This graph has a vertical asymptote at  and has been vertically reflected. We do not know yet the vertical shift or 
the vertical stretch. We know so far that the equation will have form: 



586     6 • Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

It appears the graph passes through the points  and  Substituting 

Next, substituting in  , 

This gives us the equation 

Analysis 
We can verify this answer by comparing the function values in Table 5 with the points on the graph in Figure 15. 

−1 0 1 2 3 

1 0 −0.58496 −1 −1.3219 

4 5 6 7 8 

−1.5850 −1.8074 −2 −2.1699 −2.3219 

Table 5 

 TRY IT #11 Give the equation of the natural logarithm graphed in Figure 16. 

Figure 16 

 Q&A Is it possible to tell the domain and range and describe the end behavior of a function just by 
looking at the graph? 

Yes, if we know the function is a general logarithmic function. For example, look at the graph in Figure 
16. The graph approaches  (or thereabouts) more and more closely, so  is, or is very 
close to, the vertical asymptote. It approaches from the right, so the domain is all points to the right, 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.4 • Graphs of Logarithmic Functions     587

 The range, as with all general logarithmic functions, is all real numbers. And we can see 
the end behavior because the graph goes down as it goes left and up as it goes right. The end behavior 
is that as ∞  and as ∞ ∞

 MEDIA 

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with graphing logarithms. 

Graph an Exponential Function and Logarithmic Function (https://openstax.org/l/graphexplog) 
Match Graphs with Exponential and Logarithmic Functions (https://openstax.org/l/matchexplog) 
Find the Domain of Logarithmic Functions (https://openstax.org/l/domainlog) 

 6.4 SECTION EXERCISES 
Verbal 

1 . The inverse of every  2 . What type(s) of  3 . What type(s) of 
logarithmic function is an translation(s), if any, affect translation(s), if any, affect 
exponential function and the range of a logarithmic the domain of a logarithmic 
vice-versa. What does this function? function? 
tell us about the relationship 
between the coordinates of 
the points on the graphs of 
each? 

4 . Consider the general  5 . Does the graph of a general 
logarithmic function logarithmic function have a 

 Why can’t horizontal asymptote? 
be zero? Explain. 

Algebraic 

For the following exercises, state the domain and range of the function. 

6 .  7 .  8 . 

9 .  10 . 

For the following exercises, state the domain and the vertical asymptote of the function. 
11 .  12 .  13 . 

14 .  15 . 

For the following exercises, state the domain, vertical asymptote, and end behavior of the function. 

16 .  17 .  18 . 

19 .  20 . 

For the following exercises, state the domain, range, and x- and y-intercepts, if they exist. If they do not exist, write DNE. 
21 .  22 .  23 . 

24 .  25 . 



588     6 • Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

Graphical 

For the following exercises, match each function in Figure 17 with the letter corresponding to its graph. 

Figure 17 
26 .  27 .  28 . 

29 .  30 . 

For the following exercises, match each function in Figure 18 with the letter corresponding to its graph. 

Figure 18 
31 .  32 .  33 . 

For the following exercises, sketch the graphs of each pair of functions on the same axis. 
34 .  and  35 .  and 36 .  and 

37 .  and 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.4 • Graphs of Logarithmic Functions     589

For the following exercises, match each function in Figure 19 with the letter corresponding to its graph. 

Figure 19 
38 .  39 .  40 . 

For the following exercises, sketch the graph of the indicated function. 
41 . 42 .  43 . 

44 .  45 . 46 . 

For the following exercises, write a logarithmic equation corresponding to the graph shown. 
47 . Use  as the parent 48 . Use  as the parent 49 . Use  as the parent 

function. function. function. 



590     6 • Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

50 . Use  as the parent 
function. 

Technology 

For the following exercises, use a graphing calculator to find approximate solutions to each equation. 
51 .  52 . 

53 .  54 .  55 . 

Extensions 

56 . Let  be any positive real  57 . Explore and discuss the  58 . Prove the conjecture made 
number such that graphs of in the previous exercise. 
What must  be equal 
to? Verify the result. and 

Make a conjecture based 
on the result. 

59 . What is the domain of the 60 . Use properties of 
function exponents to find the 
Discuss the result. x-intercepts of the function 

algebraically. Show the 
steps for solving, and then 
verify the result by 
graphing the function. 

6.5 Logarithmic Properties 
Learning Objectives 
In this section, you will: 

Use the product rule for logarithms. 
Use the quotient rule for logarithms. 
Use the power rule for logarithms. 
Expand logarithmic expressions. 
Condense logarithmic expressions. 
Use the change-of-base formula for logarithms. 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.5 • Logarithmic Properties     591

Figure 1 The pH of hydrochloric acid is tested with litmus paper. (credit: David Berardan) 
In chemistry, pH is used as a measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a substance. The pH scale runs from 0 to 14. 
Substances with a pH less than 7 are considered acidic, and substances with a pH greater than 7 are said to be basic. Our 
bodies, for instance, must maintain a pH close to 7.35 in order for enzymes to work properly. To get a feel for what is 
acidic and what is basic, consider the following pH levels of some common substances: 

• Battery acid: 0.8 
• Stomach acid: 2.7 
• Orange juice: 3.3 
• Pure water: 7 (at 25° C) 
• Human blood: 7.35 
• Fresh coconut: 7.8 
• Sodium hydroxide (lye): 14 

To determine whether a solution is acidic or basic, we find its pH, which is a measure of the number of active positive 
hydrogen ions in the solution. The pH is defined by the following formula, where  is the concentration of hydrogen 
ion in the solution 

The equivalence of  and  is one of the logarithm properties we will examine in this section. 

Using the Product Rule for Logarithms 
Recall that the logarithmic and exponential functions “undo” each other. This means that logarithms have similar 
properties to exponents. Some important properties of logarithms are given here. First, the following properties are easy 
to prove. 

For example,  since  And  since 

Next, we have the inverse property. 

For example, to evaluate  we can rewrite the logarithm as  and then apply the inverse property 
 to get 

To evaluate  we can rewrite the logarithm as  and then apply the inverse property  to get 

Finally, we have the one-to-one property. 



592     6 • Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

We can use the one-to-one property to solve the equation  for  Since the bases are the same, 
we can apply the one-to-one property by setting the arguments equal and solving for 

But what about the equation  The one-to-one property does not help us in this instance. 
Before we can solve an equation like this, we need a method for combining terms on the left side of the equation. 
Recall that we use the product rule of exponents to combine the product of powers by adding exponents: 
We have a similar property for logarithms, called the product rule for logarithms, which says that the logarithm of a 
product is equal to a sum of logarithms. Because logs are exponents, and we multiply like bases, we can add the 
exponents. We will use the inverse property to derive the product rule below. 
Given any real number  and positive real numbers  and  where  we will show 

Let  and  In exponential form, these equations are  and  It follows that 

Note that repeated applications of the product rule for logarithms allow us to simplify the logarithm of the product of 
any number of factors. For example, consider  Using the product rule for logarithms, we can rewrite this 
logarithm of a product as the sum of logarithms of its factors: 

The Product Rule for Logarithms 

The product rule for logarithms can be used to simplify a logarithm of a product by rewriting it as a sum of 
individual logarithms. 

...
HOW TO 

Given the logarithm of a product, use the product rule of logarithms to write an equivalent sum of logarithms. 

1. Factor the argument completely, expressing each whole number factor as a product of primes. 
2. Write the equivalent expression by summing the logarithms of each factor. 

EXAMPLE 1 

Using the Product Rule for Logarithms 
Expand 

Solution 
We begin by factoring the argument completely, expressing  as a product of primes. 

Next we write the equivalent equation by summing the logarithms of each factor. 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.5 • Logarithmic Properties     593

 TRY IT #1 Expand 

Using the Quotient Rule for Logarithms 
For quotients, we have a similar rule for logarithms. Recall that we use the quotient rule of exponents to combine the 
quotient of exponents by subtracting:  The quotient rule for logarithms says that the logarithm of a 
quotient is equal to a difference of logarithms. Just as with the product rule, we can use the inverse property to derive 
the quotient rule. 
Given any real number  and positive real numbers   and  where  we will show 

Let  and  In exponential form, these equations are  and  It follows that 

For example, to expand  we must first express the quotient in lowest terms. Factoring and canceling we 
get, 

Next we apply the quotient rule by subtracting the logarithm of the denominator from the logarithm of the numerator. 
Then we apply the product rule. 

The Quotient Rule for Logarithms 

The quotient rule for logarithms can be used to simplify a logarithm or a quotient by rewriting it as the difference of 
individual logarithms. 

...
HOW TO 

Given the logarithm of a quotient, use the quotient rule of logarithms to write an equivalent difference of 
logarithms. 

1. Express the argument in lowest terms by factoring the numerator and denominator and canceling common 
terms. 

2. Write the equivalent expression by subtracting the logarithm of the denominator from the logarithm of the 
numerator. 

3. Check to see that each term is fully expanded. If not, apply the product rule for logarithms to expand completely. 



594     6 • Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

EXAMPLE 2 

Using the Quotient Rule for Logarithms 
Expand 

Solution 
First we note that the quotient is factored and in lowest terms, so we apply the quotient rule. 

Notice that the resulting terms are logarithms of products. To expand completely, we apply the product rule, noting that 
the prime factors of the factor 15 are 3 and 5. 

Analysis 
There are exceptions to consider in this and later examples. First, because denominators must never be zero, this 
expression is not defined for  and  Also, since the argument of a logarithm must be positive, we note as we 
observe the expanded logarithm, that    and  Combining these conditions is beyond the 
scope of this section, and we will not consider them here or in subsequent exercises. 

 TRY IT #2 Expand 

Using the Power Rule for Logarithms 
We’ve explored the product rule and the quotient rule, but how can we take the logarithm of a power, such as  One 
method is as follows: 

Notice that we used the product rule for logarithms to find a solution for the example above. By doing so, we have 
derived the power rule for logarithms, which says that the log of a power is equal to the exponent times the log of the 
base. Keep in mind that, although the input to a logarithm may not be written as a power, we may be able to change it to 
a power. For example, 

The Power Rule for Logarithms 

The power rule for logarithms can be used to simplify the logarithm of a power by rewriting it as the product of the 
exponent times the logarithm of the base. 

...
HOW TO 

Given the logarithm of a power, use the power rule of logarithms to write an equivalent product of a factor 
and a logarithm. 

1. Express the argument as a power, if needed. 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.5 • Logarithmic Properties     595

2. Write the equivalent expression by multiplying the exponent times the logarithm of the base. 

EXAMPLE 3 

Expanding a Logarithm with Powers 
Expand 

Solution 
The argument is already written as a power, so we identify the exponent, 5, and the base,  and rewrite the equivalent 
expression by multiplying the exponent times the logarithm of the base. 

 TRY IT #3 Expand 

EXAMPLE 4 

Rewriting an Expression as a Power before Using the Power Rule 
Expand  using the power rule for logs. 

Solution 
Expressing the argument as a power, we get 

Next we identify the exponent, 2, and the base, 5, and rewrite the equivalent expression by multiplying the exponent 
times the logarithm of the base. 

 TRY IT #4 Expand 

EXAMPLE 5 

Using the Power Rule in Reverse 
Rewrite  using the power rule for logs to a single logarithm with a leading coefficient of 1. 

Solution 
Because the logarithm of a power is the product of the exponent times the logarithm of the base, it follows that the 
product of a number and a logarithm can be written as a power. For the expression  we identify the factor, 4, as 
the exponent and the argument,  as the base, and rewrite the product as a logarithm of a power: 

 TRY IT #5 Rewrite  using the power rule for logs to a single logarithm with a leading coefficient of 1. 

Expanding Logarithmic Expressions 
Taken together, the product rule, quotient rule, and power rule are often called “laws of logs.” Sometimes we apply more 
than one rule in order to simplify an expression. For example: 

We can use the power rule to expand logarithmic expressions involving negative and fractional exponents. Here is an 
alternate proof of the quotient rule for logarithms using the fact that a reciprocal is a negative power: 



596     6 • Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

We can also apply the product rule to express a sum or difference of logarithms as the logarithm of a product. 
With practice, we can look at a logarithmic expression and expand it mentally, writing the final answer. Remember, 
however, that we can only do this with products, quotients, powers, and roots—never with addition or subtraction inside 
the argument of the logarithm. 

EXAMPLE 6 

Expanding Logarithms Using Product, Quotient, and Power Rules 
Rewrite  as a sum or difference of logs. 

Solution 
First, because we have a quotient of two expressions, we can use the quotient rule: 

Then seeing the product in the first term, we use the product rule: 

Finally, we use the power rule on the first term: 

 TRY IT #6 Expand 

EXAMPLE 7 

Using the Power Rule for Logarithms to Simplify the Logarithm of a Radical Expression 
Expand 

Solution 

 TRY IT #7 Expand 

 Q&A Can we expand 

No. There is no way to expand the logarithm of a sum or difference inside the argument of the 
logarithm. 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.5 • Logarithmic Properties     597

EXAMPLE 8 

Expanding Complex Logarithmic Expressions 
Expand 

Solution 
We can expand by applying the Product and Quotient Rules. 

 TRY IT #8 Expand 

Condensing Logarithmic Expressions 
We can use the rules of logarithms we just learned to condense sums, differences, and products with the same base as a 
single logarithm. It is important to remember that the logarithms must have the same base to be combined. We will 
learn later how to change the base of any logarithm before condensing. 

...
HOW TO 

Given a sum, difference, or product of logarithms with the same base, write an equivalent expression as a 
single logarithm. 

1. Apply the power property first. Identify terms that are products of factors and a logarithm, and rewrite each as 
the logarithm of a power. 

2. Next apply the product property. Rewrite sums of logarithms as the logarithm of a product. 
3. Apply the quotient property last. Rewrite differences of logarithms as the logarithm of a quotient. 

EXAMPLE 9 

Using the Product and Quotient Rules to Combine Logarithms 
Write  as a single logarithm. 

Solution 
Using the product and quotient rules 

This reduces our original expression to 

Then, using the quotient rule 

 TRY IT #9 Condense 



598     6 • Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

EXAMPLE 10 

Condensing Complex Logarithmic Expressions 
Condense 

Solution 
We apply the power rule first: 

Next we apply the product rule to the sum: 

Finally, we apply the quotient rule to the difference: 

 TRY IT #10 Rewrite  as a single logarithm. 

EXAMPLE 11 

Rewriting as a Single Logarithm 
Rewrite  as a single logarithm. 

Solution 
We apply the power rule first: 

Next we rearrange and apply the product rule to the sum: 

Finally, we apply the quotient rule to the difference: 

 TRY IT #11 Condense 

EXAMPLE 12 

Applying of the Laws of Logs 
Recall that, in chemistry,  If the concentration of hydrogen ions in a liquid is doubled, what is the effect 
on pH? 

Solution 
Suppose  is the original concentration of hydrogen ions, and  is the original pH of the liquid. Then  If the 
concentration is doubled, the new concentration is  Then the pH of the new liquid is 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.5 • Logarithmic Properties     599

Using the product rule of logs 

Since  the new pH is 

When the concentration of hydrogen ions is doubled, the pH decreases by about 0.301. 

 TRY IT #12 How does the pH change when the concentration of positive hydrogen ions is decreased by half? 

Using the Change-of-Base Formula for Logarithms 
Most calculators can evaluate only common and natural logs. In order to evaluate logarithms with a base other than 10 
or  we use the change-of-base formula to rewrite the logarithm as the quotient of logarithms of any other base; when 
using a calculator, we would change them to common or natural logs. 
To derive the change-of-base formula, we use the one-to-one property and power rule for logarithms. 
Given any positive real numbers  and  where  and  we show 

Let By exponentiating both sides with base , we arrive at an exponential form, namely  It follows 
that 

For example, to evaluate  using a calculator, we must first rewrite the expression as a quotient of common or 
natural logs. We will use the common log. 

The Change-of-Base Formula 

The change-of-base formula can be used to evaluate a logarithm with any base. 

For any positive real numbers  and  where  and 

It follows that the change-of-base formula can be used to rewrite a logarithm with any base as the quotient of 
common or natural logs. 

and 



600     6 • Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

...
HOW TO 

Given a logarithm with the form  use the change-of-base formula to rewrite it as a quotient of logs with 
any positive base  where 

1. Determine the new base  remembering that the common log,  has base 10, and the natural log, 
has base 

2. Rewrite the log as a quotient using the change-of-base formula 
a. The numerator of the quotient will be a logarithm with base  and argument 
b. The denominator of the quotient will be a logarithm with base  and argument 

EXAMPLE 13 

Changing Logarithmic Expressions to Expressions Involving Only Natural Logs 
Change  to a quotient of natural logarithms. 

Solution 
Because we will be expressing  as a quotient of natural logarithms, the new base, 

We rewrite the log as a quotient using the change-of-base formula. The numerator of the quotient will be the natural log 
with argument 3. The denominator of the quotient will be the natural log with argument 5. 

 TRY IT #13 Change  to a quotient of natural logarithms. 

 Q&A Can we change common logarithms to natural logarithms? 

Yes. Remember that  means  So, 

EXAMPLE 14 

Using the Change-of-Base Formula with a Calculator 
Evaluate  using the change-of-base formula with a calculator. 

Solution 
According to the change-of-base formula, we can rewrite the log base 2 as a logarithm of any other base. Since our 
calculators can evaluate the natural log, we might choose to use the natural logarithm, which is the log base 

 TRY IT #14 Evaluate  using the change-of-base formula. 

 MEDIA 

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with laws of logarithms. 

The Properties of Logarithms (https://openstax.org/l/proplog) 
Expand Logarithmic Expressions (https://openstax.org/l/expandlog) 
Evaluate a Natural Logarithmic Expression (https://openstax.org/l/evaluatelog) 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.5 • Logarithmic Properties     601

 6.5 SECTION EXERCISES 
Verbal 

1 . How does the power rule for logarithms help when  2 . What does the change-of-base formula do? Why is 
solving logarithms with the form it useful when using a calculator? 

Algebraic 

For the following exercises, expand each logarithm as much as possible. Rewrite each expression as a sum, difference, or 
product of logs. 

3 .  4 .  5 . 

6 .  7 .  8 . 

For the following exercises, condense to a single logarithm if possible. 
9 .  10 . 

11 .  12 .  13 . 

14 . 

For the following exercises, use the properties of logarithms to expand each logarithm as much as possible. Rewrite each 
expression as a sum, difference, or product of logs. 

15 .  16 .  17 . 

18 .  19 . 

For the following exercises, condense each expression to a single logarithm using the properties of logarithms. 

20 .  21 .  22 . 

23 .  24 . 

For the following exercises, rewrite each expression as an equivalent ratio of logs using the indicated base. 
25 .  to base  26 .  to base 

For the following exercises, suppose  and  Use the change-of-base formula along with 
properties of logarithms to rewrite each expression in terms of  and  Show the steps for solving. 

27 .  28 .  29 . 

Numeric 

For the following exercises, use properties of logarithms to evaluate without using a calculator. 

30 .  31 .  32 . 

For the following exercises, use the change-of-base formula to evaluate each expression as a quotient of natural logs. 
Use a calculator to approximate each to five decimal places. 
33 .  34 .  35 . 



602     6 • Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

36 .  37 . 

Extensions 

38 . Use the product rule for logarithms to find all  39 . Use the quotient rule for logarithms to find all 
values such that values such that 

 Show the steps Show the steps for solving. 
for solving. 

40 . Can the power property of  41 . Prove that  42 . Does 
logarithms be derived from  for any 
the power property of positive integers  and Verify the claim 
exponents using the algebraically. 
equation  If not, 
explain why. If so, show the 
derivation. 

6.6 Exponential and Logarithmic Equations 
Learning Objectives 
In this section, you will: 

Use like bases to solve exponential equations. 
Use logarithms to solve exponential equations. 
Use the definition of a logarithm to solve logarithmic equations. 
Use the one-to-one property of logarithms to solve logarithmic equations. 
Solve applied problems involving exponential and logarithmic equations. 

Figure 1 Wild rabbits in Australia. The rabbit population grew so quickly in Australia that the event became known as the 
“rabbit plague.” (credit: Richard Taylor, Flickr) 
In 1859, an Australian landowner named Thomas Austin released 24 rabbits into the wild for hunting. Because Australia 
had few predators and ample food, the rabbit population exploded. In fewer than ten years, the rabbit population 
numbered in the millions. 
Uncontrolled population growth, as in the wild rabbits in Australia, can be modeled with exponential functions. 
Equations resulting from those exponential functions can be solved to analyze and make predictions about exponential 
growth. In this section, we will learn techniques for solving exponential functions. 

Using Like Bases to Solve Exponential Equations 
The first technique involves two functions with like bases. Recall that the one-to-one property of exponential functions 
tells us that, for any real numbers   and  where   if and only if 
In other words, when an exponential equation has the same base on each side, the exponents must be equal. This also 
applies when the exponents are algebraic expressions. Therefore, we can solve many exponential equations by using the 
rules of exponents to rewrite each side as a power with the same base. Then, we use the fact that exponential functions 
are one-to-one to set the exponents equal to one another, and solve for the unknown. 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.6 • Exponential and Logarithmic Equations     603

For example, consider the equation  To solve for  we use the division property of exponents to rewrite the 
right side so that both sides have the common base,  Then we apply the one-to-one property of exponents by setting 
the exponents equal to one another and solving for : 

Using the One-to-One Property of Exponential Functions to Solve Exponential Equations 

For any algebraic expressions  and any positive real number 

...
HOW TO 

Given an exponential equation with the form  where  and  are algebraic expressions with an 
unknown, solve for the unknown. 

1. Use the rules of exponents to simplify, if necessary, so that the resulting equation has the form 
2. Use the one-to-one property to set the exponents equal. 
3. Solve the resulting equation,  for the unknown. 

EXAMPLE 1 

Solving an Exponential Equation with a Common Base 
Solve 

Solution 

 TRY IT #1 Solve 

Rewriting Equations So All Powers Have the Same Base 
Sometimes the common base for an exponential equation is not explicitly shown. In these cases, we simply rewrite the 
terms in the equation as powers with a common base, and solve using the one-to-one property. 

For example, consider the equation  We can rewrite both sides of this equation as a power of  Then we 
apply the rules of exponents, along with the one-to-one property, to solve for 



604     6 • Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

...
HOW TO 

Given an exponential equation with unlike bases, use the one-to-one property to solve it. 

1. Rewrite each side in the equation as a power with a common base. 
2. Use the rules of exponents to simplify, if necessary, so that the resulting equation has the form 
3. Use the one-to-one property to set the exponents equal. 
4. Solve the resulting equation,  for the unknown. 

EXAMPLE 2 

Solving Equations by Rewriting Them to Have a Common Base 
Solve 

Solution 

 TRY IT #2 Solve 

EXAMPLE 3 

Solving Equations by Rewriting Roots with Fractional Exponents to Have a Common Base 
Solve 

Solution 

 TRY IT #3 Solve 

 Q&A Do all exponential equations have a solution? If not, how can we tell if there is a solution during 
the problem-solving process? 

No. Recall that the range of an exponential function is always positive. While solving the equation, we 
may obtain an expression that is undefined. 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.6 • Exponential and Logarithmic Equations     605

EXAMPLE 4 

Solving an Equation with Positive and Negative Powers 
Solve 

Solution 
This equation has no solution. There is no real value of  that will make the equation a true statement because any 
power of a positive number is positive. 

Analysis 
Figure 2 shows that the two graphs do not cross so the left side is never equal to the right side. Thus the equation has no 
solution. 

Figure 2 

 TRY IT #4 Solve 

Solving Exponential Equations Using Logarithms 
Sometimes the terms of an exponential equation cannot be rewritten with a common base. In these cases, we solve by 
taking the logarithm of each side. Recall, since  is equivalent to  we may apply logarithms with the 
same base on both sides of an exponential equation. 

...
HOW TO 

Given an exponential equation in which a common base cannot be found, solve for the unknown. 

1. Apply the logarithm of both sides of the equation. 
a. If one of the terms in the equation has base 10, use the common logarithm. 
b. If none of the terms in the equation has base 10, use the natural logarithm. 

2. Use the rules of logarithms to solve for the unknown. 

EXAMPLE 5 

Solving an Equation Containing Powers of Different Bases 
Solve 



606     6 • Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

Solution 

 TRY IT #5 Solve 

 Q&A Is there any way to solve 

Yes. The solution is 

Equations Containing e 
One common type of exponential equations are those with base  This constant occurs again and again in nature, in 
mathematics, in science, in engineering, and in finance. When we have an equation with a base  on either side, we can 
use the natural logarithm to solve it. 

...
HOW TO 

Given an equation of the form  solve for 

1. Divide both sides of the equation by 
2. Apply the natural logarithm of both sides of the equation. 
3. Divide both sides of the equation by 

EXAMPLE 6 

Solve an Equation of the Form y = Aekt 

Solve 

Solution 

Analysis 
Using laws of logs, we can also write this answer in the form  If we want a decimal approximation of the 
answer, we use a calculator. 

 TRY IT #6 Solve 

 Q&A Does every equation of the form  have a solution? 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.6 • Exponential and Logarithmic Equations     607

No. There is a solution when  and when  and  are either both 0 or neither 0, and they have the 
same sign. An example of an equation with this form that has no solution is 

EXAMPLE 7 

Solving an Equation That Can Be Simplified to the Form y = Aekt 

Solve 

Solution 

 TRY IT #7 Solve 

Extraneous Solutions 
Sometimes the methods used to solve an equation introduce an extraneous solution, which is a solution that is correct 
algebraically but does not satisfy the conditions of the original equation. One such situation arises in solving when the 
logarithm is taken on both sides of the equation. In such cases, remember that the argument of the logarithm must be 
positive. If the number we are evaluating in a logarithm function is negative, there is no output. 

EXAMPLE 8 

Solving Exponential Functions in Quadratic Form 
Solve 

Solution 

Analysis 
When we plan to use factoring to solve a problem, we always get zero on one side of the equation, because zero has the 
unique property that when a product is zero, one or both of the factors must be zero. We reject the equation 
because a positive number never equals a negative number. The solution  is not a real number, and in the real 
number system this solution is rejected as an extraneous solution. 

 TRY IT #8 Solve 

 Q&A Does every logarithmic equation have a solution? 

No. Keep in mind that we can only apply the logarithm to a positive number. Always check for 
extraneous solutions. 



608     6 • Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

Using the Definition of a Logarithm to Solve Logarithmic Equations 
We have already seen that every logarithmic equation  is equivalent to the exponential equation  We 
can use this fact, along with the rules of logarithms, to solve logarithmic equations where the argument is an algebraic 
expression. 
For example, consider the equation  To solve this equation, we can use rules of logarithms 
to rewrite the left side in compact form and then apply the definition of logs to solve for 

Using the Definition of a Logarithm to Solve Logarithmic Equations 

For any algebraic expression  and real numbers  and  where 

EXAMPLE 9 

Using Algebra to Solve a Logarithmic Equation 
Solve 

Solution 

 TRY IT #9 Solve 

EXAMPLE 10 

Using Algebra Before and After Using the Definition of the Natural Logarithm 
Solve 

Solution 

 TRY IT #10 Solve 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.6 • Exponential and Logarithmic Equations     609

EXAMPLE 11 

Using a Graph to Understand the Solution to a Logarithmic Equation 
Solve 

Solution 

Figure 3 represents the graph of the equation. On the graph, the x-coordinate of the point at which the two graphs 
intersect is close to 20. In other words  A calculator gives a better approximation: 

Figure 3 The graphs of  and  cross at the point  which is approximately (20.0855, 3). 

 TRY IT #11 Use a graphing calculator to estimate the approximate solution to the logarithmic equation 
 to 2 decimal places. 

Using the One-to-One Property of Logarithms to Solve Logarithmic Equations 
As with exponential equations, we can use the one-to-one property to solve logarithmic equations. The one-to-one 
property of logarithmic functions tells us that, for any real numbers    and any positive real number 
where 

For example, 

So, if  then we can solve for  and we get  To check, we can substitute  into the original equation: 
 In other words, when a logarithmic equation has the same base on each side, the arguments 

must be equal. This also applies when the arguments are algebraic expressions. Therefore, when given an equation with 
logs of the same base on each side, we can use rules of logarithms to rewrite each side as a single logarithm. Then we 
use the fact that logarithmic functions are one-to-one to set the arguments equal to one another and solve for the 
unknown. 
For example, consider the equation  To solve this equation, we can use the rules of 
logarithms to rewrite the left side as a single logarithm, and then apply the one-to-one property to solve for 

To check the result, substitute  into 



610     6 • Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

Using the One-to-One Property of Logarithms to Solve Logarithmic Equations 

For any algebraic expressions  and  and any positive real number  where 

Note, when solving an equation involving logarithms, always check to see if the answer is correct or if it is an 
extraneous solution. 

...
HOW TO 

Given an equation containing logarithms, solve it using the one-to-one property. 

1. Use the rules of logarithms to combine like terms, if necessary, so that the resulting equation has the form 

2. Use the one-to-one property to set the arguments equal. 
3. Solve the resulting equation,  for the unknown. 

EXAMPLE 12 

Solving an Equation Using the One-to-One Property of Logarithms 
Solve 

Solution 

Analysis 
There are two solutions:  or  The solution  is negative, but it checks when substituted into the original equation 
because the argument of the logarithm functions is still positive. 

 TRY IT #12 Solve 

Solving Applied Problems Using Exponential and Logarithmic Equations 
In previous sections, we learned the properties and rules for both exponential and logarithmic functions. We have seen 
that any exponential function can be written as a logarithmic function and vice versa. We have used exponents to solve 
logarithmic equations and logarithms to solve exponential equations. We are now ready to combine our skills to solve 
equations that model real-world situations, whether the unknown is in an exponent or in the argument of a logarithm. 
One such application is in science, in calculating the time it takes for half of the unstable material in a sample of a 
radioactive substance to decay, called its half-life. Table 1 lists the half-life for several of the more common radioactive 
substances. 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.6 • Exponential and Logarithmic Equations     611

Substance Use Half-life 

gallium-67 nuclear medicine 80 hours 

cobalt-60 manufacturing 5.3 years 

technetium-99m nuclear medicine 6 hours 

americium-241 construction 432 years 

carbon-14 archeological dating 5,730 years 

uranium-235 atomic power 703,800,000 years 

Table 1 

We can see how widely the half-lives for these substances vary. Knowing the half-life of a substance allows us to calculate 
the amount remaining after a specified time. We can use the formula for radioactive decay: 

where 
•  is the amount initially present 
•  is the half-life of the substance 
•  is the time period over which the substance is studied 
•  is the amount of the substance present after time 

EXAMPLE 13 

Using the Formula for Radioactive Decay to Find the Quantity of a Substance 
How long will it take for ten percent of a 1000-gram sample of uranium-235 to decay? 

Solution 

Analysis 
Ten percent of 1000 grams is 100 grams. If 100 grams decay, the amount of uranium-235 remaining is 900 grams. 

 TRY IT #13 How long will it take before twenty percent of our 1000-gram sample of uranium-235 has 



612     6 • Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

decayed? 

 MEDIA 

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with exponential and logarithmic equations. 

Solving Logarithmic Equations (https://openstax.org/l/solvelogeq) 
Solving Exponential Equations with Logarithms (https://openstax.org/l/solveexplog) 

 6.6 SECTION EXERCISES 
Verbal 

1 . How can an exponential  2 . When does an extraneous  3 . When can the one-to-one 
equation be solved? solution occur? How can an property of logarithms be 

extraneous solution be used to solve an equation? 
recognized? When can it not be used? 

Algebraic 

For the following exercises, use like bases to solve the exponential equation. 

4 .  5 .  6 . 

7 .  8 .  9 . 

10 . 

For the following exercises, use logarithms to solve. 

11 .  12 .  13 . 

14 .  15 .  16 . 

17 .  18 .  19 . 

20 .  21 .  22 . 

23 .  24 .  25 . 

26 .  27 .  28 . 

For the following exercises, use the definition of a logarithm to rewrite the equation as an exponential equation. 

29 .  30 . 

For the following exercises, use the definition of a logarithm to solve the equation. 
31 .  32 .  33 . 

34 .  35 . 

For the following exercises, use the one-to-one property of logarithms to solve. 
36 .  37 .  38 . 

39 .  40 .  41 . 

42 .  43 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.6 • Exponential and Logarithmic Equations     613

For the following exercises, solve each equation for 
44 .  45 .  46 . 

47 .  48 .  49 . 

50 . 

Graphical 

For the following exercises, solve the equation for  if there is a solution. Then graph both sides of the equation, and 
observe the point of intersection (if it exists) to verify the solution. 
51 . 52 .  53 . 

54 .  55 . 56 . 

57 . 58 .  59 . 

60 .  61 . 62 . 

63 . 64 . 

For the following exercises, solve for the indicated value, and graph the situation showing the solution point. 
65 . An account with an initial 66 . The formula for measuring  67 . The population of a small 

deposit of  earns sound intensity in decibels town is modeled by the 
 annual interest,  is defined by the equation 

compounded continuously. equation where  is measured in 
How much will the account  where years. In approximately 
be worth after 20 years? how many years will the 

is the intensity of the town’s population reach 
sound in watts per square 
meter and  is 
the lowest level of sound 
that the average person 
can hear. How many 
decibels are emitted from a 
jet plane with a sound 
intensity of  watts 
per square meter? 

Technology 

For the following exercises, solve each equation by rewriting the exponential expression using the indicated logarithm. 
Then use a calculator to approximate the variable to 3 decimal places. 

68 .  using  69 .  using the natural  70 .  using the 
the common log. log common log 

71 .  using the  72 .  using the 
common log natural log 

For the following exercises, use a calculator to solve the equation. Unless indicated otherwise, round all answers to the 
nearest ten-thousandth. 

73 .  74 .  75 . 



614     6 • Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

76 . Atmospheric pressure  in pounds per square  77 . The magnitude M of an earthquake is represented 
inch is represented by the formula by the equation  where  is the 

 where  is the number of miles 
above sea level. To the nearest foot, how high is amount of energy released by the earthquake in 
the peak of a mountain with an atmospheric joules and  is the assigned minimal 
pressure of  pounds per square inch? (Hint: measure released by an earthquake. To the 
there are 5280 feet in a mile) nearest hundredth, what would the magnitude be 

of an earthquake releasing  joules of 
energy? 

Extensions 

78 . Use the definition of a  79 . Recall the formula for  80 . Recall the compound 
logarithm along with the continually compounding interest formula 
one-to-one property of interest,  Use the  Use the 
logarithms to prove that definition of a logarithm definition of a logarithm 

along with properties of along with properties of 
logarithms to solve the logarithms to solve the 
formula for time  such formula for time 
that  is equal to a single 
logarithm. 

81 . Newton’s Law of Cooling states that the 
temperature  of an object at any time t can be 
described by the equation 

 where  is the 
temperature of the surrounding environment, 
is the initial temperature of the object, and  is 
the cooling rate. Use the definition of a logarithm 
along with properties of logarithms to solve the 
formula for time  such that  is equal to a single 
logarithm. 

6.7 Exponential and Logarithmic Models 
Learning Objectives 
In this section, you will: 

Model exponential growth and decay. 
Use Newton’s Law of Cooling. 
Use logistic-growth models. 
Choose an appropriate model for data. 
Express an exponential model in base  . 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.7 • Exponential and Logarithmic Models     615

Figure 1 A nuclear research reactor inside the Neely Nuclear Research Center on the Georgia Institute of Technology 
campus (credit: Georgia Tech Research Institute) 
We have already explored some basic applications of exponential and logarithmic functions. In this section, we explore 
some important applications in more depth, including radioactive isotopes and Newton’s Law of Cooling. 

Modeling Exponential Growth and Decay 
In real-world applications, we need to model the behavior of a function. In mathematical modeling, we choose a familiar 
general function with properties that suggest that it will model the real-world phenomenon we wish to analyze. In the 
case of rapid growth, we may choose the exponential growth function: 

where  is equal to the value at time zero,  is Euler’s constant, and  is a positive constant that determines the rate 
(percentage) of growth. We may use the exponential growth function in applications involving doubling time, the time it 
takes for a quantity to double. Such phenomena as wildlife populations, financial investments, biological samples, and 
natural resources may exhibit growth based on a doubling time. In some applications, however, as we will see when we 
discuss the logistic equation, the logistic model sometimes fits the data better than the exponential model. 
On the other hand, if a quantity is falling rapidly toward zero, without ever reaching zero, then we should probably 
choose the exponential decay model. Again, we have the form  where  is the starting value, and  is Euler’s 
constant. Now  is a negative constant that determines the rate of decay. We may use the exponential decay model 
when we are calculating half-life, or the time it takes for a substance to exponentially decay to half of its original 
quantity. We use half-life in applications involving radioactive isotopes. 
In our choice of a function to serve as a mathematical model, we often use data points gathered by careful observation 
and measurement to construct points on a graph and hope we can recognize the shape of the graph. Exponential 
growth and decay graphs have a distinctive shape, as we can see in Figure 2 and Figure 3. It is important to remember 
that, although parts of each of the two graphs seem to lie on the x-axis, they are really a tiny distance above the x-axis. 



616     6 • Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

Figure 2 A graph showing exponential growth. The equation is 

Figure 3 A graph showing exponential decay. The equation is 
Exponential growth and decay often involve very large or very small numbers. To describe these numbers, we often use 
orders of magnitude. The order of magnitude is the power of ten, when the number is expressed in scientific notation, 
with one digit to the left of the decimal. For example, the distance to the nearest star, Proxima Centauri, measured in 
kilometers, is 40,113,497,200,000 kilometers. Expressed in scientific notation, this is  So, we could 
describe this number as having order of magnitude 

Characteristics of the Exponential Function, 

An exponential function with the form  has the following characteristics: 

• one-to-one function 
• horizontal asymptote: 
• domain: ∞ ∞
• range: ∞
• x intercept: none 
• y-intercept: 
• increasing if  (see Figure 4) 
• decreasing if  (see Figure 4) 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.7 • Exponential and Logarithmic Models     617

Figure 4 An exponential function models exponential growth when  and exponential decay when 

EXAMPLE 1 

Graphing Exponential Growth 
A population of bacteria doubles every hour. If the culture started with 10 bacteria, graph the population as a function of 
time. 

Solution 
When an amount grows at a fixed percent per unit time, the growth is exponential. To find  we use the fact that  is 
the amount at time zero, so  To find  use the fact that after one hour  the population doubles from 
to  The formula is derived as follows 

so  Thus the equation we want to graph is  The graph is shown in Figure 5. 

Figure 5 The graph of 

Analysis 
The population of bacteria after ten hours is 10,240. We could describe this amount is being of the order of magnitude 

 The population of bacteria after twenty hours is 10,485,760 which is of the order of magnitude  so we could say 



618     6 • Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

that the population has increased by three orders of magnitude in ten hours. 

Half-Life 
We now turn to exponential decay. One of the common terms associated with exponential decay, as stated above, is 
half-life, the length of time it takes an exponentially decaying quantity to decrease to half its original amount. Every 
radioactive isotope has a half-life, and the process describing the exponential decay of an isotope is called radioactive 
decay. 
To find the half-life of a function describing exponential decay, solve the following equation: 

We find that the half-life depends only on the constant  and not on the starting quantity 
The formula is derived as follows 

Since  the time, is positive,  must, as expected, be negative. This gives us the half-life formula 

...
HOW TO 

Given the half-life, find the decay rate. 

1. Write 
2. Replace  by  and replace  by the given half-life. 
3. Solve to find  Express  as an exact value (do not round). 

Note: It is also possible to find the decay rate using 

EXAMPLE 2 

Finding the Function that Describes Radioactive Decay 
The half-life of carbon-14 is 5,730 years. Express the amount of carbon-14 remaining as a function of time, 

Solution 
This formula is derived as follows. 

The function that describes this continuous decay is  We observe that the coefficient of 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.7 • Exponential and Logarithmic Models     619

 is negative, as expected in the case of exponential decay. 

 TRY IT #1 The half-life of plutonium-244 is 80,000,000 years. Find a function that gives the amount of 
plutonium-244 remaining as a function of time, measured in years. 

Radiocarbon Dating 
The formula for radioactive decay is important in radiocarbon dating, which is used to calculate the approximate date a 
plant or animal died. Radiocarbon dating was discovered in 1949 by Willard Libby, who won a Nobel Prize for his 
discovery. It compares the difference between the ratio of two isotopes of carbon in an organic artifact or fossil to the 
ratio of those two isotopes in the air. It is believed to be accurate to within about 1% error for plants or animals that died 
within the last 60,000 years. 
Carbon-14 is a radioactive isotope of carbon that has a half-life of 5,730 years. It occurs in small quantities in the carbon 
dioxide in the air we breathe. Most of the carbon on Earth is carbon-12, which has an atomic weight of 12 and is not 
radioactive. Scientists have determined the ratio of carbon-14 to carbon-12 in the air for the last 60,000 years, using tree 
rings and other organic samples of known dates—although the ratio has changed slightly over the centuries. 
As long as a plant or animal is alive, the ratio of the two isotopes of carbon in its body is close to the ratio in the 
atmosphere. When it dies, the carbon-14 in its body decays and is not replaced. By comparing the ratio of carbon-14 to 
carbon-12 in a decaying sample to the known ratio in the atmosphere, the date the plant or animal died can be 
approximated. 
Since the half-life of carbon-14 is 5,730 years, the formula for the amount of carbon-14 remaining after  years is 

where 
•  is the amount of carbon-14 remaining 
•  is the amount of carbon-14 when the plant or animal began decaying. 

This formula is derived as follows: 

To find the age of an object, we solve this equation for 

Out of necessity, we neglect here the many details that a scientist takes into consideration when doing carbon-14 dating, 
and we only look at the basic formula. The ratio of carbon-14 to carbon-12 in the atmosphere is approximately 
0.0000000001%. Let  be the ratio of carbon-14 to carbon-12 in the organic artifact or fossil to be dated, determined by a 
method called liquid scintillation. From the equation  we know the ratio of the percentage of 
carbon-14 in the object we are dating to the initial amount of carbon-14 in the object when it was formed is 

 We solve this equation for  to get 



620     6 • Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

...
HOW TO 

Given the percentage of carbon-14 in an object, determine its age. 

1. Express the given percentage of carbon-14 as an equivalent decimal, 
2. Substitute for k in the equation  and solve for the age, 

EXAMPLE 3 

Finding the Age of a Bone 
A bone fragment is found that contains 20% of its original carbon-14. To the nearest year, how old is the bone? 

Solution 
We substitute  for  in the equation and solve for 

The bone fragment is about 13,301 years old. 

Analysis 
The instruments that measure the percentage of carbon-14 are extremely sensitive and, as we mention above, a scientist 
will need to do much more work than we did in order to be satisfied. Even so, carbon dating is only accurate to about 1%, 
so this age should be given as 

 TRY IT #2 Cesium-137 has a half-life of about 30 years. If we begin with 200 mg of cesium-137, will it take 
more or less than 230 years until only 1 milligram remains? 

Calculating Doubling Time 
For decaying quantities, we determined how long it took for half of a substance to decay. For growing quantities, we 
might want to find out how long it takes for a quantity to double. As we mentioned above, the time it takes for a quantity 
to double is called the doubling time. 
Given the basic exponential growth equation  doubling time can be found by solving for when the original 
quantity has doubled, that is, by solving 
The formula is derived as follows: 

Thus the doubling time is 

EXAMPLE 4 

Finding a Function That Describes Exponential Growth 
According to Moore’s Law, the doubling time for the number of transistors that can be put on a computer chip is 
approximately two years. Give a function that describes this behavior. 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.7 • Exponential and Logarithmic Models     621

Solution 
The formula is derived as follows: 

The function is 

 TRY IT #3 Recent data suggests that, as of 2013, the rate of growth predicted by Moore’s Law no longer 
holds. Growth has slowed to a doubling time of approximately three years. Find the new function 
that takes that longer doubling time into account. 

Using Newton’s Law of Cooling 
Exponential decay can also be applied to temperature. When a hot object is left in surrounding air that is at a lower 
temperature, the object’s temperature will decrease exponentially, leveling off as it approaches the surrounding air 
temperature. On a graph of the temperature function, the leveling off will correspond to a horizontal asymptote at the 
temperature of the surrounding air. Unless the room temperature is zero, this will correspond to a vertical shift of the 
generic exponential decay function. This translation leads to Newton’s Law of Cooling, the scientific formula for 
temperature as a function of time as an object’s temperature is equalized with the ambient temperature 

This formula is derived as follows: 

Newton’s Law of Cooling 

The temperature of an object,  in surrounding air with temperature  will behave according to the formula 

where 

•  is time 
•  is the difference between the initial temperature of the object and the surroundings 
•  is a constant, the continuous rate of cooling of the object 

...
HOW TO 

Given a set of conditions, apply Newton’s Law of Cooling. 

1. Set  equal to the y-coordinate of the horizontal asymptote (usually the ambient temperature). 
2. Substitute the given values into the continuous growth formula  to find the parameters  and 

3. Substitute in the desired time to find the temperature or the desired temperature to find the time. 



622     6 • Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

EXAMPLE 5 

Using Newton’s Law of Cooling 
A cheesecake is taken out of the oven with an ideal internal temperature of  and is placed into a  refrigerator. 
After 10 minutes, the cheesecake has cooled to  If we must wait until the cheesecake has cooled to  before 
we eat it, how long will we have to wait? 

Solution 
Because the surrounding air temperature in the refrigerator is 35 degrees, the cheesecake’s temperature will decay 
exponentially toward 35, following the equation 

We know the initial temperature was 165, so 

We were given another data point,  which we can use to solve for 

This gives us the equation for the cooling of the cheesecake: 
Now we can solve for the time it will take for the temperature to cool to 70 degrees. 

It will take about 107 minutes, or one hour and 47 minutes, for the cheesecake to cool to 

 TRY IT #4 A pitcher of water at 40 degrees Fahrenheit is placed into a 70 degree room. One hour later, the 
temperature has risen to 45 degrees. How long will it take for the temperature to rise to 60 
degrees? 

Using Logistic Growth Models 
Exponential growth cannot continue forever. Exponential models, while they may be useful in the short term, tend to fall 
apart the longer they continue. Consider an aspiring writer who writes a single line on day one and plans to double the 
number of lines she writes each day for a month. By the end of the month, she must write over 17 billion lines, or one-
half-billion pages. It is impractical, if not impossible, for anyone to write that much in such a short period of time. 
Eventually, an exponential model must begin to approach some limiting value, and then the growth is forced to slow. For 
this reason, it is often better to use a model with an upper bound instead of an exponential growth model, though the 
exponential growth model is still useful over a short term, before approaching the limiting value. 
The logistic growth model is approximately exponential at first, but it has a reduced rate of growth as the output 
approaches the model’s upper bound, called the carrying capacity. For constants  and  the logistic growth of a 
population over time  is represented by the model 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.7 • Exponential and Logarithmic Models     623

The graph in Figure 6 shows how the growth rate changes over time. The graph increases from left to right, but the 
growth rate only increases until it reaches its point of maximum growth rate, at which point the rate of increase 
decreases. 

Figure 6 

Logistic Growth 

The logistic growth model is 

where 

•  is the initial value 
•  is the carrying capacity, or limiting value 
•  is a constant determined by the rate of growth. 

EXAMPLE 6 

Using the Logistic-Growth Model 
An influenza epidemic spreads through a population rapidly, at a rate that depends on two factors: The more people who 
have the flu, the more rapidly it spreads, and also the more uninfected people there are, the more rapidly it spreads. 
These two factors make the logistic model a good one to study the spread of communicable diseases. And, clearly, there 
is a maximum value for the number of people infected: the entire population. 
For example, at time  there is one person in a community of 1,000 people who has the flu. So, in that community, at 
most 1,000 people can have the flu. Researchers find that for this particular strain of the flu, the logistic growth constant 
is  Estimate the number of people in this community who will have had this flu after ten days. Predict how 
many people in this community will have had this flu after a long period of time has passed. 

Solution 
We substitute the given data into the logistic growth model 

Because at most 1,000 people, the entire population of the community, can get the flu, we know the limiting value is 
 To find  we use the formula that the number of cases at time  is  from which it follows that 

 This model predicts that, after ten days, the number of people who have had the flu is 



624     6 • Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

 Because the actual number must be a whole number (a person has either had the flu or 
not) we round to 294. In the long term, the number of people who will contract the flu is the limiting value, 

Analysis 
Remember that, because we are dealing with a virus, we cannot predict with certainty the number of people infected. 
The model only approximates the number of people infected and will not give us exact or actual values. 
The graph in Figure 7 gives a good picture of how this model fits the data. 

Figure 7 The graph of 

 TRY IT #5 Using the model in Example 6, estimate the number of cases of flu on day 15. 

Choosing an Appropriate Model for Data 
Now that we have discussed various mathematical models, we need to learn how to choose the appropriate model for 
the raw data we have. Many factors influence the choice of a mathematical model, among which are experience, 
scientific laws, and patterns in the data itself. Not all data can be described by elementary functions. Sometimes, a 
function is chosen that approximates the data over a given interval. For instance, suppose data were gathered on the 
number of homes bought in the United States from the years 1960 to 2013. After plotting these data in a scatter plot, we 
notice that the shape of the data from the years 2000 to 2013 follow a logarithmic curve. We could restrict the interval 
from 2000 to 2010, apply regression analysis using a logarithmic model, and use it to predict the number of home 
buyers for the year 2015. 
Three kinds of functions that are often useful in mathematical models are linear functions, exponential functions, and 
logarithmic functions. If the data lies on a straight line, or seems to lie approximately along a straight line, a linear model 
may be best. If the data is non-linear, we often consider an exponential or logarithmic model, though other models, such 
as quadratic models, may also be considered. 
In choosing between an exponential model and a logarithmic model, we look at the way the data curves. This is called 
the concavity. If we draw a line between two data points, and all (or most) of the data between those two points lies 
above that line, we say the curve is concave down. We can think of it as a bowl that bends downward and therefore 
cannot hold water. If all (or most) of the data between those two points lies below the line, we say the curve is concave 
up. In this case, we can think of a bowl that bends upward and can therefore hold water. An exponential curve, whether 
rising or falling, whether representing growth or decay, is always concave up away from its horizontal asymptote. A 
logarithmic curve is always concave away from its vertical asymptote. In the case of positive data, which is the most 
common case, an exponential curve is always concave up, and a logarithmic curve always concave down. 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.7 • Exponential and Logarithmic Models     625

A logistic curve changes concavity. It starts out concave up and then changes to concave down beyond a certain point, 
called a point of inflection. 
After using the graph to help us choose a type of function to use as a model, we substitute points, and solve to find the 
parameters. We reduce round-off error by choosing points as far apart as possible. 

EXAMPLE 7 

Choosing a Mathematical Model 
Does a linear, exponential, logarithmic, or logistic model best fit the values listed in Table 1? Find the model, and use a 
graph to check your choice. 

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 

0 1.386 2.197 2.773 3.219 3.584 3.892 4.159 4.394 

Table 1 

Solution 
First, plot the data on a graph as in Figure 8. For the purpose of graphing, round the data to two decimal places. 

Figure 8 
Clearly, the points do not lie on a straight line, so we reject a linear model. If we draw a line between any two of the 
points, most or all of the points between those two points lie above the line, so the graph is concave down, suggesting a 
logarithmic model. We can try  Plugging in the first point,  gives  We reject the case that 

 (if it were, all outputs would be 0), so we know  Thus  and  Next we can use the point 
 to solve for 

Because  an appropriate model for the data is 

To check the accuracy of the model, we graph the function together with the given points as in Figure 9. 



626     6 • Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

Figure 9 The graph of 
We can conclude that the model is a good fit to the data. 

Compare Figure 9 to the graph of  shown in Figure 10. 

Figure 10 The graph of 

The graphs appear to be identical when  A quick check confirms this conclusion:  for 

However, if  the graph of  includes a “extra” branch, as shown in Figure 11. This occurs because, while 
 cannot have negative values in the domain (as such values would force the argument to be negative), the 

function  can have negative domain values. 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.7 • Exponential and Logarithmic Models     627

Figure 11 

 TRY IT #6 Does a linear, exponential, or logarithmic model best fit the data in Table 2? Find the model. 

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 

3.297 5.437 8.963 14.778 24.365 40.172 66.231 109.196 180.034 

Table 2 

Expressing an Exponential Model in Base 
While powers and logarithms of any base can be used in modeling, the two most common bases are  and  In science 
and mathematics, the base  is often preferred. We can use laws of exponents and laws of logarithms to change any 
base to base 

...
HOW TO 

Given a model with the form  change it to the form 

1. Rewrite  as 
2. Use the power rule of logarithms to rewrite y as 
3. Note that  and  in the equation 

EXAMPLE 8 

Changing to base e 
Change the function  so that this same function is written in the form 

Solution 
The formula is derived as follows 

 TRY IT #7 Change the function  to one having  as the base. 

 MEDIA 

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with exponential and logarithmic models. 



628     6 • Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

Logarithm Application – pH (https://openstax.org/l/logph) 
Exponential Model – Age Using Half-Life (https://openstax.org/l/expmodelhalf) 
Newton’s Law of Cooling (https://openstax.org/l/newtoncooling) 
Exponential Growth Given Doubling Time (https://openstax.org/l/expgrowthdbl) 
Exponential Growth – Find Initial Amount Given Doubling Time (https://openstax.org/l/initialdouble) 

 6.7 SECTION EXERCISES 
Verbal 

1 . With what kind of  2 . What is carbon dating? Why  3 . With what kind of 
exponential model would does it work? Give an exponential model would 
half-life be associated? What example in which carbon doubling time be 
role does half-life play in dating would be useful. associated? What role does 
these models? doubling time play in these 

models? 
4 . Define Newton’s Law of  5 . What is an order of 

Cooling. Then name at least magnitude? Why are orders 
three real-world situations of magnitude useful? Give 
where Newton’s Law of an example to explain. 
Cooling would be applied. 

Numeric 

6 . The temperature of an 
object in degrees Fahrenheit 
after t minutes is 
represented by the equation 

 To 
the nearest degree, what is 
the temperature of the 
object after one and a half 
hours? 

For the following exercises, use the logistic growth model 

7 . Find and interpret  8 . Find and interpret  9 . Find the carrying capacity. 
Round to the nearest tenth. Round to the nearest tenth. 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.7 • Exponential and Logarithmic Models     629

10 . Graph the model.  11 . Determine whether the  12 . Rewrite 
data from the table could as an exponential equation 
best be represented as a with base  to five decimal 
function that is linear, places. 
exponential, or 
logarithmic. Then write a 
formula for a model that 
represents the data. 

–2 0.694 

–1 0.833 

0 1 

1 1.2 

2 1.44 

3 1.728 

4 2.074 

5 2.488 



630     6 • Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

Technology 

For the following exercises, enter the data from each table into a graphing calculator and graph the resulting scatter 
plots. Determine whether the data from the table could represent a function that is linear, exponential, or logarithmic. 
13 . 14 . 15 . 

1 2 1 2.4 4 9.429 

2 4.079 2 2.88 5 9.972 

3 5.296 3 3.456 6 10.415 

4 6.159 4 4.147 7 10.79 

5 6.828 5 4.977 8 11.115 

6 7.375 6 5.972 9 11.401 

7 7.838 7 7.166 10 11.657 

8 8.238 8 8.6 11 11.889 

9 8.592 9 10.32 12 12.101 

10 8.908 10 12.383 13 12.295 

16 . 

1.25 5.75 

2.25 8.75 

3.56 12.68 

4.2 14.6 

5.65 18.95 

6.75 22.25 

7.25 23.75 

8.6 27.8 

9.25 29.75 

10.5 33.5 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.7 • Exponential and Logarithmic Models     631

For the following exercises, use a graphing calculator and this scenario: the population of a fish farm in  years is 
modeled by the equation 

17 . Graph the function. 18 . What is the initial  19 . To the nearest tenth, what 
population of fish? is the doubling time for the 

fish population? 
20 . To the nearest whole  21 . To the nearest tenth, how  22 . What is the carrying 

number, what will the fish long will it take for the capacity for the fish 
population be after population to reach population? Justify your 
years? answer using the graph of 

Extensions 

23 . A substance has a half-life  24 . The formula for an  25 . Recall the formula for 
of 2.045 minutes. If the increasing population is calculating the magnitude 
initial amount of the given by of an earthquake, 
substance was 132.8 where  is the initial  Show 
grams, how many half-lives population and 
will have passed before the Derive a general formula each step for solving this 
substance decays to 8.3 for the time t it takes for equation algebraically for 
grams? What is the total the population to increase the seismic moment 
time of decay? by a factor of M. 

26 . What is the y-intercept of  27 . Prove that  for 
the logistic growth model positive 

 Show the 
steps for calculation. What 
does this point tell us 
about the population? 

Real-World Applications 

For the following exercises, use this scenario: A doctor prescribes 125 milligrams of a therapeutic drug that decays by 
about 30% each hour. 
28 . To the nearest hour, what is  29 . Write an exponential  30 . Using the model found in 

the half-life of the drug? model representing the the previous exercise, find 
amount of the drug  and interpret the 
remaining in the patient’s result. Round to the 
system after  hours. Then nearest hundredth. 
use the formula to find the 
amount of the drug that 
would remain in the 
patient’s system after 3 
hours. Round to the 
nearest milligram. 



632     6 • Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

For the following exercises, use this scenario: A tumor is injected with  grams of Iodine-125, which has a decay rate of 
 per day. 

31 . To the nearest day, how  32 . Write an exponential  33 . A scientist begins with 
long will it take for half of model representing the grams of a radioactive 
the Iodine-125 to decay? amount of Iodine-125 substance. After 

remaining in the tumor minutes, the sample has 
after  days. Then use the decayed to  grams. 
formula to find the amount Rounding to five decimal 
of Iodine-125 that would places, write an 
remain in the tumor after exponential equation 
60 days. Round to the representing this situation. 
nearest tenth of a gram. To the nearest minute, 

what is the half-life of this 
substance? 

34 . The half-life of Radium-226  35 . The half-life of Erbium-165  36 . A wooden artifact from an 
is  years. What is the is  hours. What is the archeological dig contains 
annual decay rate? Express hourly decay rate? Express 60 percent of the 
the decimal result to four the decimal result to four carbon-14 that is present in 
decimal places and the decimal places and the living trees. To the nearest 
percentage to two decimal percentage to two decimal year, about how many 
places. places. years old is the artifact? 

(The half-life of carbon-14 
is  years.) 

37 . A research student is 
working with a culture of 
bacteria that doubles in 
size every twenty minutes. 
The initial population count 
was  bacteria. 
Rounding to five decimal 
places, write an 
exponential equation 
representing this situation. 
To the nearest whole 
number, what is the 
population size after 
hours? 

For the following exercises, use this scenario: A biologist recorded a count of  bacteria present in a culture after 5 
minutes and 1000 bacteria present after 20 minutes. 
38 . To the nearest whole  39 . Rounding to six decimal 

number, what was the places, write an 
initial population in the exponential equation 
culture? representing this situation. 

To the nearest minute, how 
long did it take the 
population to double? 

For the following exercises, use this scenario: A pot of warm soup with an internal temperature of  Fahrenheit was 
taken off the stove to cool in a  room. After fifteen minutes, the internal temperature of the soup was 
40 . Use Newton’s Law of  41 . To the nearest minute, how  42 . To the nearest degree, 

Cooling to write a formula long will it take the soup to what will the temperature 
that models this situation. cool to be after  and a half hours? 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.8 • Fitting Exponential Models to Data     633

For the following exercises, use this scenario: A turkey is taken out of the oven with an internal temperature of 
and is allowed to cool in a  room. After half an hour, the internal temperature of the turkey is 
43 . Write a formula that  44 . To the nearest degree,  45 . To the nearest minute, how 

models this situation. what will the temperature long will it take the turkey 
be after 50 minutes? to cool to 

For the following exercises, find the value of the number shown on each logarithmic scale. Round all answers to the 
nearest thousandth. 
46 . 47 . 

48 . Plot each set of approximate values of intensity of  49 . Recall the formula for calculating the magnitude 
sounds on a logarithmic scale: Whisper: of an earthquake,  One 

 Vacuum:  Jet: 
earthquake has magnitude  on the MMS scale. 
If a second earthquake has  times as much 
energy as the first, find the magnitude of the 
second quake. Round to the nearest hundredth. 

For the following exercises, use this scenario: The equation  models the number of people in a town 
who have heard a rumor after t days. 
50 . How many people started  51 . To the nearest whole  52 . As  increases without 

the rumor? number, how many people bound, what value does 
will have heard the rumor  approach? Interpret 
after 3 days? your answer. 

For the following exercise, choose the correct answer choice. 
53 . A doctor injects a patient with 13 milligrams of 

radioactive dye that decays exponentially. After 12 
minutes, there are 4.75 milligrams of dye 
remaining in the patient’s system. Which is an 
appropriate model for this situation? 
ⓐ  ⓑ  
ⓒ  
ⓓ  

6.8 Fitting Exponential Models to Data 
Learning Objectives 
In this section, you will: 

Build an exponential model from data. 
Build a logarithmic model from data. 
Build a logistic model from data. 

In previous sections of this chapter, we were either given a function explicitly to graph or evaluate, or we were given a set 
of points that were guaranteed to lie on the curve. Then we used algebra to find the equation that fit the points exactly. 
In this section, we use a modeling technique called regression analysis to find a curve that models data collected from 
real-world observations. With regression analysis, we don’t expect all the points to lie perfectly on the curve. The idea is 
to find a model that best fits the data. Then we use the model to make predictions about future events. 
Do not be confused by the word model. In mathematics, we often use the terms function, equation, and model 
interchangeably, even though they each have their own formal definition. The term model is typically used to indicate 
that the equation or function approximates a real-world situation. 
We will concentrate on three types of regression models in this section: exponential, logarithmic, and logistic. Having 



634     6 • Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

already worked with each of these functions gives us an advantage. Knowing their formal definitions, the behavior of 
their graphs, and some of their real-world applications gives us the opportunity to deepen our understanding. As each 
regression model is presented, key features and definitions of its associated function are included for review. Take a 
moment to rethink each of these functions, reflect on the work we’ve done so far, and then explore the ways regression 
is used to model real-world phenomena. 

Building an Exponential Model from Data 
As we’ve learned, there are a multitude of situations that can be modeled by exponential functions, such as investment 
growth, radioactive decay, atmospheric pressure changes, and temperatures of a cooling object. What do these 
phenomena have in common? For one thing, all the models either increase or decrease as time moves forward. But 
that’s not the whole story. It’s the way data increase or decrease that helps us determine whether it is best modeled by 
an exponential equation. Knowing the behavior of exponential functions in general allows us to recognize when to use 
exponential regression, so let’s review exponential growth and decay. 
Recall that exponential functions have the form  or  When performing regression analysis, we use the 
form most commonly used on graphing utilities,  Take a moment to reflect on the characteristics we’ve already 
learned about the exponential function  (assume 

•  must be greater than zero and not equal to one. 
• The initial value of the model is 

◦ If  the function models exponential growth. As  increases, the outputs of the model increase slowly at 
first, but then increase more and more rapidly, without bound. 

◦ If  the function models exponential decay. As  increases, the outputs for the model decrease rapidly 
at first and then level off to become asymptotic to the x-axis. In other words, the outputs never become equal to 
or less than zero. 

As part of the results, your calculator will display a number known as the correlation coefficient, labeled by the variable 
or  (You may have to change the calculator’s settings for these to be shown.) The values are an indication of the 
“goodness of fit” of the regression equation to the data. We more commonly use the value of  instead of  but the 
closer either value is to 1, the better the regression equation approximates the data. 

Exponential Regression 

Exponential regression is used to model situations in which growth begins slowly and then accelerates rapidly without 
bound, or where decay begins rapidly and then slows down to get closer and closer to zero. We use the command 
“ExpReg” on a graphing utility to fit an exponential function to a set of data points. This returns an equation of the 
form, 

Note that: 

•  must be non-negative. 
• when  we have an exponential growth model. 
• when  we have an exponential decay model. 

...
HOW TO 

Given a set of data, perform exponential regression using a graphing utility. 

1. Use the STAT then EDIT menu to enter given data. 
a. Clear any existing data from the lists. 
b. List the input values in the L1 column. 
c. List the output values in the L2 column. 

2. Graph and observe a scatter plot of the data using the STATPLOT feature. 
a. Use ZOOM [9] to adjust axes to fit the data. 
b. Verify the data follow an exponential pattern. 

3. Find the equation that models the data. 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.8 • Fitting Exponential Models to Data     635

a. Select “ExpReg” from the STAT then CALC menu. 
b. Use the values returned for a and b to record the model, 

4. Graph the model in the same window as the scatterplot to verify it is a good fit for the data. 

EXAMPLE 1 

Using Exponential Regression to Fit a Model to Data 
In 2007, a university study was published investigating the crash risk of alcohol impaired driving. Data from 2,871 
crashes were used to measure the association of a person’s blood alcohol level (BAC) with the risk of being in an 
accident. Table 1 shows results from the study 9 . The relative risk is a measure of how many times more likely a person is 
to crash. So, for example, a person with a BAC of 0.09 is 3.54 times as likely to crash as a person who has not been 
drinking alcohol. 

BAC 0 0.01 0.03 0.05 0.07 0.09 

Relative Risk of Crashing 1 1.03 1.06 1.38 2.09 3.54 

BAC 0.11 0.13 0.15 0.17 0.19 0.21 

Relative Risk of Crashing 6.41 12.6 22.1 39.05 65.32 99.78 

Table 1 

a. Let  represent the BAC level, and let  represent the corresponding relative risk. Use exponential regression to fit a 
model to these data. 

b. After 6 drinks, a person weighing 160 pounds will have a BAC of about  How many times more likely is a person 
with this weight to crash if they drive after having a 6-pack of beer? Round to the nearest hundredth. 

Solution 
a. Using the STAT then EDIT menu on a graphing utility, list the BAC values in L1 and the relative risk values in L2. Then 

use the STATPLOT feature to verify that the scatterplot follows the exponential pattern shown in Figure 1: 

Figure 1 
Use the “ExpReg” command from the STAT then CALC menu to obtain the exponential model, 

9 Source: Indiana University Center for Studies of Law in Action, 2007 



636     6 • Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

Converting from scientific notation, we have: 

Notice that  which indicates the model is a good fit to the data. To see this, graph the model in the same 
window as the scatterplot to verify it is a good fit as shown in Figure 2: 

Figure 2 
b. Use the model to estimate the risk associated with a BAC of  Substitute  for  in the model and solve for 

If a 160-pound person drives after having 6 drinks, they are about 26.35 times more likely to crash than if driving 
while sober. 

 TRY IT #1 Table 2 shows a recent graduate’s credit card balance each month after graduation. 

Month 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 

Debt ($) 620.00 761.88 899.80 1039.93 1270.63 1589.04 1851.31 2154.92 

Table 2 

ⓐ  Use exponential regression to fit a model to these data. 
ⓑ  If spending continues at this rate, what will the graduate’s credit card debt be one year after 
graduating? 

 Q&A Is it reasonable to assume that an exponential regression model will represent a situation 
indefinitely? 

No. Remember that models are formed by real-world data gathered for regression. It is usually 
reasonable to make estimates within the interval of original observation (interpolation). However, when 
a model is used to make predictions, it is important to use reasoning skills to determine whether the 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.8 • Fitting Exponential Models to Data     637

model makes sense for inputs far beyond the original observation interval (extrapolation). 

Building a Logarithmic Model from Data 
Just as with exponential functions, there are many real-world applications for logarithmic functions: intensity of sound, 
pH levels of solutions, yields of chemical reactions, production of goods, and growth of infants. As with exponential 
models, data modeled by logarithmic functions are either always increasing or always decreasing as time moves 
forward. Again, it is the way they increase or decrease that helps us determine whether a logarithmic model is best. 
Recall that logarithmic functions increase or decrease rapidly at first, but then steadily slow as time moves on. By 
reflecting on the characteristics we’ve already learned about this function, we can better analyze real world situations 
that reflect this type of growth or decay. When performing logarithmic regression analysis, we use the form of the 
logarithmic function most commonly used on graphing utilities,  For this function 

• All input values,  must be greater than zero. 
• The point  is on the graph of the model. 
• If  the model is increasing. Growth increases rapidly at first and then steadily slows over time. 
• If  the model is decreasing. Decay occurs rapidly at first and then steadily slows over time. 

Logarithmic Regression 

Logarithmic regression is used to model situations where growth or decay accelerates rapidly at first and then slows 
over time. We use the command “LnReg” on a graphing utility to fit a logarithmic function to a set of data points. This 
returns an equation of the form, 

Note that 

• all input values,  must be non-negative. 
• when  the model is increasing. 
• when  the model is decreasing. 

...
HOW TO 

Given a set of data, perform logarithmic regression using a graphing utility. 

1. Use the STAT then EDIT menu to enter given data. 
a. Clear any existing data from the lists. 
b. List the input values in the L1 column. 
c. List the output values in the L2 column. 

2. Graph and observe a scatter plot of the data using the STATPLOT feature. 
a. Use ZOOM [9] to adjust axes to fit the data. 
b. Verify the data follow a logarithmic pattern. 

3. Find the equation that models the data. 
a. Select “LnReg” from the STAT then CALC menu. 
b. Use the values returned for a and b to record the model, 

4. Graph the model in the same window as the scatterplot to verify it is a good fit for the data. 

EXAMPLE 2 

Using Logarithmic Regression to Fit a Model to Data 
Due to advances in medicine and higher standards of living, life expectancy has been increasing in most developed 
countries since the beginning of the 20th century. 



638     6 • Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

Table 3 shows the average life expectancies, in years, of Americans from 1900–201010 . 

Year 1900 1910 1920 1930 1940 1950 

Life Expectancy(Years) 47.3 50.0 54.1 59.7 62.9 68.2 

Year 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010 

Life Expectancy(Years) 69.7 70.8 73.7 75.4 76.8 78.7 

Table 3 

ⓐ  Let  represent time in decades starting with  for the year 1900,  for the year 1910, and so on. Let 
represent the corresponding life expectancy. Use logarithmic regression to fit a model to these data. 
ⓑ  Use the model to predict the average American life expectancy for the year 2030. 

10 Source: Center for Disease Control and Prevention, 2013 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.8 • Fitting Exponential Models to Data     639

Solution 
ⓐ  Using the STAT then EDIT menu on a graphing utility, list the years using values 1–12 in L1 and the 
corresponding life expectancy in L2. Then use the STATPLOT feature to verify that the scatterplot follows a logarithmic 
pattern as shown in Figure 3: 

Figure 3 
Use the “LnReg” command from the STAT then CALC menu to obtain the logarithmic model, 

Next, graph the model in the same window as the scatterplot to verify it is a good fit as shown in Figure 4: 

Figure 4 

ⓑ  To predict the life expectancy of an American in the year 2030, substitute  for the in the model and solve 
for 

If life expectancy continues to increase at this pace, the average life expectancy of an American will be 79.1 by the 
year 2030. 



640     6 • Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

 TRY IT #2 Sales of a video game released in the year 2000 took off at first, but then steadily slowed as time 
moved on. Table 4 shows the number of games sold, in thousands, from the years 2000–2010. 

Year 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 

Number Sold (thousands) 142 149 154 155 159 161 

Year 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 - 

Number Sold (thousands) 163 164 164 166 167 - 

Table 4 

ⓐ  Let  represent time in years starting with  for the year 2000. Let  represent the 
number of games sold in thousands. Use logarithmic regression to fit a model to these data. 
ⓑ  If games continue to sell at this rate, how many games will sell in 2015? Round to the nearest 
thousand. 

Building a Logistic Model from Data 
Like exponential and logarithmic growth, logistic growth increases over time. One of the most notable differences with 
logistic growth models is that, at a certain point, growth steadily slows and the function approaches an upper bound, or 
limiting value. Because of this, logistic regression is best for modeling phenomena where there are limits in expansion, 
such as availability of living space or nutrients. 
It is worth pointing out that logistic functions actually model resource-limited exponential growth. There are many 
examples of this type of growth in real-world situations, including population growth and spread of disease, rumors, and 
even stains in fabric. When performing logistic regression analysis, we use the form most commonly used on graphing 
utilities: 

Recall that: 
•  is the initial value of the model. 
• when  the model increases rapidly at first until it reaches its point of maximum growth rate,  At 

that point, growth steadily slows and the function becomes asymptotic to the upper bound 
•  is the limiting value, sometimes called the carrying capacity, of the model. 

Logistic Regression 

Logistic regression is used to model situations where growth accelerates rapidly at first and then steadily slows to an 
upper limit. We use the command “Logistic” on a graphing utility to fit a logistic function to a set of data points. This 
returns an equation of the form 

Note that 

• The initial value of the model is 
• Output values for the model grow closer and closer to  as time increases. 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.8 • Fitting Exponential Models to Data     641

...
HOW TO 

Given a set of data, perform logistic regression using a graphing utility. 

1. Use the STAT then EDIT menu to enter given data. 
a. Clear any existing data from the lists. 
b. List the input values in the L1 column. 
c. List the output values in the L2 column. 

2. Graph and observe a scatter plot of the data using the STATPLOT feature. 
a. Use ZOOM [9] to adjust axes to fit the data. 
b. Verify the data follow a logistic pattern. 

3. Find the equation that models the data. 
a. Select “Logistic” from the STAT then CALC menu. 
b. Use the values returned for   and  to record the model, 

4. Graph the model in the same window as the scatterplot to verify it is a good fit for the data. 

EXAMPLE 3 

Using Logistic Regression to Fit a Model to Data 
Mobile telephone service has increased rapidly in America since the mid 1990s. Today, almost all residents have cellular 
service. Table 5 shows the percentage of Americans with cellular service between the years 1995 and 2012 11 . 

Year Americans with Cellular Service (%) Year Americans with Cellular Service (%) 

1995 12.69 2004 62.852 

1996 16.35 2005 68.63 

1997 20.29 2006 76.64 

1998 25.08 2007 82.47 

1999 30.81 2008 85.68 

2000 38.75 2009 89.14 

2001 45.00 2010 91.86 

2002 49.16 2011 95.28 

2003 55.15 2012 98.17 

Table 5 

ⓐ  Let  represent time in years starting with  for the year 1995. Let  represent the corresponding percentage of 
residents with cellular service. Use logistic regression to fit a model to these data. 
ⓑ  Use the model to calculate the percentage of Americans with cell service in the year 2013. Round to the nearest 
tenth of a percent. 
ⓒ  Discuss the value returned for the upper limit,  What does this tell you about the model? What would the limiting 
value be if the model were exact? 

11 Source: The World Bank, 2013 



642     6 • Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

Solution 
ⓐ  Using the STAT then EDIT menu on a graphing utility, list the years using values 0–15 in L1 and the corresponding 
percentage in L2. Then use the STATPLOT feature to verify that the scatterplot follows a logistic pattern as shown in 
Figure 5: 

Figure 5 
Use the “Logistic” command from the STAT then CALC menu to obtain the logistic model, 

Next, graph the model in the same window as shown in Figure 6 the scatterplot to verify it is a good fit: 

Figure 6 

ⓑ 
To approximate the percentage of Americans with cellular service in the year 2013, substitute  for the in the 
model and solve for 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.8 • Fitting Exponential Models to Data     643

According to the model, about 99.3% of Americans had cellular service in 2013. 

ⓒ 
The model gives a limiting value of about 105. This means that the maximum possible percentage of Americans with 
cellular service would be 105%, which is impossible. (How could over 100% of a population have cellular service?) If the 
model were exact, the limiting value would be  and the model’s outputs would get very close to, but never 
actually reach 100%. After all, there will always be someone out there without cellular service! 

 TRY IT #3 Table 6 shows the population, in thousands, of harbor seals in the Wadden Sea over the years 
1997 to 2012. 

Year Seal Population (Thousands) Year Seal Population (Thousands) 

1997 3.493 2005 19.590 

1998 5.282 2006 21.955 

1999 6.357 2007 22.862 

2000 9.201 2008 23.869 

2001 11.224 2009 24.243 

2002 12.964 2010 24.344 

2003 16.226 2011 24.919 

2004 18.137 2012 25.108 

Table 6 

ⓐ  Let  represent time in years starting with  for the year 1997. Let  represent the 
number of seals in thousands. Use logistic regression to fit a model to these data. 
ⓑ  Use the model to predict the seal population for the year 2020. 
ⓒ  To the nearest whole number, what is the limiting value of this model? 

 MEDIA 

Access this online resource for additional instruction and practice with exponential function models. 

Exponential Regression on a Calculator (https://openstax.org/l/pregresscalc) 



644     6 • Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

 6.8 SECTION EXERCISES 
Verbal 

1 . What situations are best  2 . What is a carrying capacity?  3 . What is regression analysis? 
modeled by a logistic What kind of model has a Describe the process of 
equation? Give an example, carrying capacity built into performing regression 
and state a case for why the its formula? Why does this analysis on a graphing 
example is a good fit. make sense? utility. 

4 . What might a scatterplot of  5 . What does the y-intercept 
data points look like if it on the graph of a logistic 
were best described by a equation correspond to for 
logarithmic model? a population modeled by 

that equation? 

Graphical 

For the following exercises, match the given function of best fit with the appropriate scatterplot in Figure 7 through 
Figure 11. Answer using the letter beneath the matching graph. 

Figure 7 

Figure 8 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.8 • Fitting Exponential Models to Data     645

Figure 9 

Figure 10 

Figure 11 

6 .  7 .  8 . 



646     6 • Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

9 .  10 . 

Numeric 

11 . To the nearest whole  12 . Rewrite the exponential  13 . A logarithmic model is given 
number, what is the initial model by the equation 
value of a population  as an 
modeled by the logistic equivalent model with To the nearest hundredth, 
equation base  Express the for what value of  does 

exponent to four 
What is the carrying significant digits. 
capacity? 

14 . A logistic model is given by  15 . What is the y-intercept on 
the equation the graph of the logistic 

 To the model given in the 
nearest hundredth, for previous exercise? 
what value of t does 

Technology 

For the following exercises, use this scenario: The population  of a koi pond over  months is modeled by the function 

16 . Graph the population  17 . What was the initial  18 . How many koi will the 
model to show the population of koi? pond have after one and a 
population over a span of half years? 
years. 

19 . How many months will it  20 . Use the intersect feature to 
take before there are approximate the number 
koi in the pond? of months it will take 

before the population of 
the pond reaches half its 
carrying capacity. 

For the following exercises, use this scenario: The population  of an endangered species habitat for wolves is modeled 
by the function  where  is given in years. 

21 . Graph the population 22 . What was the initial 23 . How many wolves will the 
model to show the population of wolves habitat have after  years? 
population over a span of transported to the habitat? 

 years. 
24 . How many years will it take 25 . Use the intersect feature to 

before there are approximate the number 
wolves in the habitat? of years it will take before 

the population of the 
habitat reaches half its 
carrying capacity. 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.8 • Fitting Exponential Models to Data     647

For the following exercises, refer to Table 7. 

x 1 2 3 4 5 6 

f(x) 1125 1495 2310 3294 4650 6361 

Table 7 

26 . Use a graphing calculator 27 . Use the regression feature 28 . Write the exponential 
to create a scatter diagram to find an exponential function as an exponential 
of the data. function that best fits the equation with base 

data in the table. 
29 . Graph the exponential 30 . Use the intersect feature to 

equation on the scatter find the value of  for 
diagram. which 

For the following exercises, refer to Table 8. 

x 1 2 3 4 5 6 

f(x) 555 383 307 210 158 122 

Table 8 

31 . Use a graphing calculator 32 . Use the regression feature 33 . Write the exponential 
to create a scatter diagram to find an exponential function as an exponential 
of the data. function that best fits the equation with base 

data in the table. 
34 . Graph the exponential 35 . Use the intersect feature to 

equation on the scatter find the value of  for 
diagram. which 

For the following exercises, refer to Table 9. 

x 1 2 3 4 5 6 

f(x) 5.1 6.3 7.3 7.7 8.1 8.6 

Table 9 

36 . Use a graphing calculator 37 . Use the LOGarithm option 38 . Use the logarithmic 
to create a scatter diagram of the REGression feature function to find the value 
of the data. to find a logarithmic of the function when 

function of the form 
 that best 

fits the data in the table. 
39 . Graph the logarithmic 40 . Use the intersect feature to 

equation on the scatter find the value of  for 
diagram. which 



648     6 • Exponential and Logarithmic Functions

For the following exercises, refer to Table 10. 

x 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 

f(x) 7.5 6 5.2 4.3 3.9 3.4 3.1 2.9 

Table 10 

41 . Use a graphing calculator 42 . Use the LOGarithm option 43 . Use the logarithmic 
to create a scatter diagram of the REGression feature function to find the value 
of the data. to find a logarithmic of the function when 

function of the form 
 that best 

fits the data in the table. 
44 . Graph the logarithmic 45 . Use the intersect feature to 

equation on the scatter find the value of  for 
diagram. which 

For the following exercises, refer to Table 11. 

x 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 

f(x) 8.7 12.3 15.4 18.5 20.7 22.5 23.3 24 24.6 24.8 

Table 11 

46 . Use a graphing calculator 47 . Use the LOGISTIC 48 . Graph the logistic equation 
to create a scatter diagram regression option to find a on the scatter diagram. 
of the data. logistic growth model of 

the form  that 
best fits the data in the 
table. 

49 . To the nearest whole 50 . Use the intersect feature to 
number, what is the find the value of  for 
predicted carrying capacity which the model reaches 
of the model? half its carrying capacity. 

For the following exercises, refer to Table 12. 

0 2 4 5 7 8 10 11 15 17 

12 28.6 52.8 70.3 99.9 112.5 125.8 127.9 135.1 135.9 

Table 12 

51 . Use a graphing calculator 52 . Use the LOGISTIC 53 . Graph the logistic equation 
to create a scatter diagram regression option to find a on the scatter diagram. 
of the data. logistic growth model of 

the form  that 
best fits the data in the 
table. 

Access for free at openstax.org



6.8 • Fitting Exponential Models to Data     649

54 . To the nearest whole 55 . Use the intersect feature to 
number, what is the find the value of  for 
predicted carrying capacity which the model reaches 
of the model? half its carrying capacity. 

Extensions 

56 . Recall that the general form of a logistic equation 57 . Use a graphing utility to find an exponential 
for a population is given by  such regression formula  and a logarithmic 
that the initial population at time  is regression formula  for the points 

 Show algebraically that and  Round all numbers to 6 decimal 
places. Graph the points and both formulas along 
with the line  on the same axis. Make a 
conjecture about the relationship of the 
regression formulas. 

58 . Verify the conjecture made in the previous  59 . Find the inverse function  for the logistic 
exercise. Round all numbers to six decimal places function  Show all steps. 
when necessary. 

60 . Use the result from the previous exercise to graph 
the logistic model  along with its 
inverse on the same axis. What are the intercepts 
and asymptotes of each function? 



650     6 • Chapter Review

Chapter Review 
Key Terms 
annual percentage rate (APR)  the yearly interest rate earned by an investment account, also called nominal rate 
carrying capacity  in a logistic model, the limiting value of the output 
change-of-base formula  a formula for converting a logarithm with any base to a quotient of logarithms with any other 

base. 
common logarithm  the exponent to which 10 must be raised to get   is written simply as 
compound interest  interest earned on the total balance, not just the principal 
doubling time  the time it takes for a quantity to double 
exponential growth  a model that grows by a rate proportional to the amount present 
extraneous solution  a solution introduced while solving an equation that does not satisfy the conditions of the 

original equation 
half-life  the length of time it takes for a substance to exponentially decay to half of its original quantity 
logarithm  the exponent to which  must be raised to get  written 
logistic growth model  a function of the form  where  is the initial value,  is the carrying capacity, 

or limiting value, and  is a constant determined by the rate of growth 
natural logarithm  the exponent to which the number  must be raised to get   is written as 
Newton’s Law of Cooling  the scientific formula for temperature as a function of time as an object’s temperature is 

equalized with the ambient temperature 
nominal rate  the yearly interest rate earned by an investment account, also called annual percentage rate 
order of magnitude  the power of ten, when a number is expressed in scientific notation, with one non-zero digit to the 

left of the decimal 
power rule for logarithms  a rule of logarithms that states that the log of a power is equal to the product of the 

exponent and the log of its base 
product rule for logarithms  a rule of logarithms that states that the log of a product is equal to a sum of logarithms 
quotient rule for logarithms  a rule of logarithms that states that the log of a quotient is equal to a difference of 

logarithms 

Key Equations 

definition of the exponential 
function 

definition of exponential 
growth 

Access for free at openstax.org



6 • Chapter Review     651

compound interest formula 

 is the number of unit time periods of growth 
continuous growth formula  is the starting amount (in the continuous compounding formula a is replaced 

with P, the principal) 
 is the mathematical constant, 

General Form for the Translation of the Parent Function 

For 
Definition of the logarithmic function  if and only if 

Definition of the common logarithm For   if and only if 

Definition of the natural logarithm For   if and only if 

General Form for the Translation of the Parent Logarithmic Function 

The Product Rule for Logarithms 

The Quotient Rule for Logarithms 

The Power Rule for Logarithms 

The Change-of-Base Formula 

One-to-one property for exponential For any algebraic expressions  and  and any positive real number 
functions where 

 if and only if 

For any algebraic expression S and positive real numbers  and  where 
Definition of a logarithm 

 if and only if 

For any algebraic expressions S and T and any positive real number 
One-to-one property for logarithmic where 

functions  if and only if 



652     6 • Chapter Review

Half-life formula If   the half-life is 

Carbon-14 dating  is the amount of carbon-14 when the plant or animal died 
 is the amount of carbon-14 remaining today 

 is the age of the fossil in years 

Doubling time If   the doubling time is 
formula 

Newton’s Law of  where  is the ambient temperature,  and  is the 
Cooling continuous rate of cooling. 

Key Concepts 
6.1 Exponential Functions 

• An exponential function is defined as a function with a positive constant other than  raised to a variable exponent. 
See Example 1. 

• A function is evaluated by solving at a specific value. See Example 2 and Example 3. 
• An exponential model can be found when the growth rate and initial value are known. See Example 4. 
• An exponential model can be found when the two data points from the model are known. See Example 5. 
• An exponential model can be found using two data points from the graph of the model. See Example 6. 
• An exponential model can be found using two data points from the graph and a calculator. See Example 7. 
• The value of an account at any time  can be calculated using the compound interest formula when the principal, 

annual interest rate, and compounding periods are known. See Example 8. 
• The initial investment of an account can be found using the compound interest formula when the value of the 

account, annual interest rate, compounding periods, and life span of the account are known. See Example 9. 
• The number  is a mathematical constant often used as the base of real world exponential growth and decay 

models. Its decimal approximation is 
• Scientific and graphing calculators have the key  or  for calculating powers of  See Example 10. 
• Continuous growth or decay models are exponential models that use  as the base. Continuous growth and decay 

models can be found when the initial value and growth or decay rate are known. See Example 11 and Example 12. 

6.2 Graphs of Exponential Functions 

• The graph of the function  has a y-intercept at  domain ∞ ∞  range ∞  and horizontal 
asymptote  See Example 1. 

• If  the function is increasing. The left tail of the graph will approach the asymptote  and the right tail will 
increase without bound. 

• If  the function is decreasing. The left tail of the graph will increase without bound, and the right tail will 
approach the asymptote 

• The equation  represents a vertical shift of the parent function 
• The equation  represents a horizontal shift of the parent function  See Example 2. 
• Approximate solutions of the equation  can be found using a graphing calculator. See Example 3. 
• The equation  where  represents a vertical stretch if  or compression if  of the 

parent function  See Example 4. 
• When the parent function  is multiplied by  the result,  is a reflection about the x-axis. 

When the input is multiplied by  the result,  is a reflection about the y-axis. See Example 5. 
• All translations of the exponential function can be summarized by the general equation  See Table 

3. 
• Using the general equation  we can write the equation of a function given its description. See 

Example 6. 

Access for free at openstax.org



6 • Chapter Review     653

6.3 Logarithmic Functions 
• The inverse of an exponential function is a logarithmic function, and the inverse of a logarithmic function is an 

exponential function. 
• Logarithmic equations can be written in an equivalent exponential form, using the definition of a logarithm. See 

Example 1. 
• Exponential equations can be written in their equivalent logarithmic form using the definition of a logarithm See 

Example 2. 
• Logarithmic functions with base  can be evaluated mentally using previous knowledge of powers of  See Example 

3 and Example 4. 
• Common logarithms can be evaluated mentally using previous knowledge of powers of  See Example 5. 
• When common logarithms cannot be evaluated mentally, a calculator can be used. See Example 6. 
• Real-world exponential problems with base  can be rewritten as a common logarithm and then evaluated using a 

calculator. See Example 7. 
• Natural logarithms can be evaluated using a calculator Example 8. 

6.4 Graphs of Logarithmic Functions 
• To find the domain of a logarithmic function, set up an inequality showing the argument greater than zero, and 

solve for  See Example 1 and Example 2 
• The graph of the parent function  has an x-intercept at  domain ∞  range ∞ ∞

vertical asymptote  and 
◦ if  the function is increasing. 
◦ if  the function is decreasing. 
See Example 3. 

• The equation  shifts the parent function  horizontally 
◦ left  units if 
◦ right  units if 
See Example 4. 

• The equation  shifts the parent function  vertically 
◦ up  units if 
◦ down  units if 
See Example 5. 

• For any constant  the equation 
◦ stretches the parent function  vertically by a factor of  if 
◦ compresses the parent function  vertically by a factor of  if 

See Example 6 and Example 7. 
• When the parent function  is multiplied by  the result is a reflection about the x-axis. When the input 

is multiplied by  the result is a reflection about the y-axis. 
◦ The equation  represents a reflection of the parent function about the x-axis. 
◦ The equation  represents a reflection of the parent function about the y-axis. 

See Example 8. 
◦ A graphing calculator may be used to approximate solutions to some logarithmic equations See Example 9. 

• All translations of the logarithmic function can be summarized by the general equation 
See Table 4. 

• Given an equation with the general form  we can identify the vertical asymptote  for 
the transformation. See Example 10. 

• Using the general equation  we can write the equation of a logarithmic function given its 
graph. See Example 11. 

6.5 Logarithmic Properties 
• We can use the product rule of logarithms to rewrite the log of a product as a sum of logarithms. See Example 1. 
• We can use the quotient rule of logarithms to rewrite the log of a quotient as a difference of logarithms. See 

Example 2. 
• We can use the power rule for logarithms to rewrite the log of a power as the product of the exponent and the log 



654     6 • Chapter Review

of its base. See Example 3, Example 4, and Example 5. 
• We can use the product rule, the quotient rule, and the power rule together to combine or expand a logarithm with 

a complex input. See Example 6, Example 7, and Example 8. 
• The rules of logarithms can also be used to condense sums, differences, and products with the same base as a 

single logarithm. See Example 9, Example 10, Example 11, and Example 12. 
• We can convert a logarithm with any base to a quotient of logarithms with any other base using the change-of-base 

formula. See Example 13. 
• The change-of-base formula is often used to rewrite a logarithm with a base other than 10 and  as the quotient of 

natural or common logs. That way a calculator can be used to evaluate. See Example 14. 

6.6 Exponential and Logarithmic Equations 
• We can solve many exponential equations by using the rules of exponents to rewrite each side as a power with the 

same base. Then we use the fact that exponential functions are one-to-one to set the exponents equal to one 
another and solve for the unknown. 

• When we are given an exponential equation where the bases are explicitly shown as being equal, set the exponents 
equal to one another and solve for the unknown. See Example 1. 

• When we are given an exponential equation where the bases are not explicitly shown as being equal, rewrite each 
side of the equation as powers of the same base, then set the exponents equal to one another and solve for the 
unknown. See Example 2, Example 3, and Example 4. 

• When an exponential equation cannot be rewritten with a common base, solve by taking the logarithm of each side. 
See Example 5. 

• We can solve exponential equations with base  by applying the natural logarithm of both sides because 
exponential and logarithmic functions are inverses of each other. See Example 6 and Example 7. 

• After solving an exponential equation, check each solution in the original equation to find and eliminate any 
extraneous solutions. See Example 8. 

• When given an equation of the form  where  is an algebraic expression, we can use the definition of a 
logarithm to rewrite the equation as the equivalent exponential equation  and solve for the unknown. See 
Example 9 and Example 10. 

• We can also use graphing to solve equations with the form  We graph both equations  and 
 on the same coordinate plane and identify the solution as the x-value of the intersecting point. See Example 

11. 
• When given an equation of the form  where  and  are algebraic expressions, we can use the one-

to-one property of logarithms to solve the equation  for the unknown. See Example 12. 
• Combining the skills learned in this and previous sections, we can solve equations that model real world situations, 

whether the unknown is in an exponent or in the argument of a logarithm. See Example 13. 

6.7 Exponential and Logarithmic Models 
• The basic exponential function is  If  we have exponential growth; if  we have 

exponential decay. 
• We can also write this formula in terms of continuous growth as  where  is the starting value. If  is 

positive, then we have exponential growth when  and exponential decay when  See Example 1. 
• In general, we solve problems involving exponential growth or decay in two steps. First, we set up a model and use 

the model to find the parameters. Then we use the formula with these parameters to predict growth and decay. See 
Example 2. 

• We can find the age,  of an organic artifact by measuring the amount,  of carbon-14 remaining in the artifact and 
using the formula  to solve for  See Example 3. 

• Given a substance’s doubling time or half-time, we can find a function that represents its exponential growth or 
decay. See Example 4. 

• We can use Newton’s Law of Cooling to find how long it will take for a cooling object to reach a desired temperature, 
or to find what temperature an object will be after a given time. See Example 5. 

• We can use logistic growth functions to model real-world situations where the rate of growth changes over time, 
such as population growth, spread of disease, and spread of rumors. See Example 6. 

• We can use real-world data gathered over time to observe trends. Knowledge of linear, exponential, logarithmic, and 
logistic graphs help us to develop models that best fit our data. See Example 7. 

• Any exponential function with the form  can be rewritten as an equivalent exponential function with the 
form  where  See Example 8. 

Access for free at openstax.org



6 • Exercises     655

6.8 Fitting Exponential Models to Data 
• Exponential regression is used to model situations where growth begins slowly and then accelerates rapidly without 

bound, or where decay begins rapidly and then slows down to get closer and closer to zero. 
• We use the command “ExpReg” on a graphing utility to fit function of the form  to a set of data points. See 

Example 1. 
• Logarithmic regression is used to model situations where growth or decay accelerates rapidly at first and then slows 

over time. 
• We use the command “LnReg” on a graphing utility to fit a function of the form  to a set of data 

points. See Example 2. 
• Logistic regression is used to model situations where growth accelerates rapidly at first and then steadily slows as 

the function approaches an upper limit. 
• We use the command “Logistic” on a graphing utility to fit a function of the form  to a set of data 

points. See Example 3. 

Exercises 
Review Exercises 
Exponential Functions 
1 . Determine whether the  2 . The population of a herd of  3 . Find an exponential 

function deer is represented by the equation that passes 
represents exponential function through the points 
growth, exponential decay, where  is given in years. To and 
or neither. Explain the nearest whole number, 

what will the herd 
population be after  years? 

4 . Determine whether Table 1  5 . A retirement account is  6 . Hsu-Mei wants to save 
could represent a function that opened with an initial $5,000 for a down payment 
is linear, exponential, or neither. deposit of $8,500 and earns on a car. To the nearest 
If it appears to be exponential,  interest compounded dollar, how much will she 
find a function that passes monthly. What will the need to invest in an account 
through the points. account be worth in now with  APR, 

years? compounded daily, in order 
x 1 2 3 4 to reach her goal in  years? 

f(x) 3 0.9 0.27 0.081 

Table 1 

7 . Does the equation  8 . Suppose an investment 
 represent account is opened with an 

continuous growth, initial deposit of 
continuous decay, or earning  interest, 
neither? Explain. compounded continuously. 

How much will the account 
be worth after  years? 

Graphs of Exponential Functions 
9 . Graph the function  State the 10 . Graph the function  and its 

domain and range and give the y-intercept. reflection about the y-axis on the same axes, and 
give the y-intercept. 



656     6 • Exercises

11 . The graph of  is reflected about the  12 . The graph below shows transformations of the 
y-axis and stretched vertically by a factor of graph of  What is the equation for the 
What is the equation of the new function, transformation? 
State its y-intercept, domain, and range. 

Figure 1 

Logarithmic Functions 

13 . Rewrite  14 . Rewrite  as an  15 . Rewrite  as an 
as an equivalent equivalent exponential equivalent logarithmic 
exponential equation. equation. equation. 

16 . Rewrite  as an  17 . Solve for x if  by converting the 
equivalent logarithmic logarithmic equation  to exponential 
equation. form. 

18 . Evaluate  19 . Evaluate  without using a calculator. 
without using a calculator. 

20 . Evaluate  using a  21 . Evaluate  22 . Evaluate  using a 
calculator. Round to the without using a calculator. calculator. Round to the 
nearest thousandth. nearest thousandth. 

Graphs of Logarithmic Functions 
23 . Graph the function 24 . Graph the function 
25 . State the domain, vertical asymptote, and end 

behavior of the function 

Logarithmic Properties 
26 . Rewrite  in expanded form.  27 . Rewrite 

in compact form. 

28 . Rewrite  in expanded form.  29 . Rewrite  in compact form. 

30 . Rewrite  as a product.  31 . Rewrite  as a single logarithm. 

32 . Use properties of logarithms to expand  33 . Use properties of logarithms to expand 

Access for free at openstax.org



6 • Exercises     657

34 . Condense the expression  35 . Condense the expression 
to a single logarithm.  to a single logarithm. 

36 . Rewrite  to base  37 . Rewrite  as a logarithm. Then apply 
the change of base formula to solve for  using 
the common log. Round to the nearest 
thousandth. 

Exponential and Logarithmic Equations 
38 . Solve  39 . Solve  by  40 . Use logarithms to find the 

 by exact solution for 
rewriting each side with a rewriting each side with a  If there 
common base. common base. is no solution, write no 

solution. 
41 . Use logarithms to find the  42 . Find the exact solution for  43 . Find the exact solution for 

exact solution for  . If there is no  If there 
 If there solution, write no solution. is no solution, write no 

is no solution, write no solution. 
solution. 

44 . Find the exact solution for  45 . Find the exact solution for  46 . Use the definition of a 
 If there is  If logarithm to solve. 

no solution, write no there is no solution, write 
solution. no solution. 

47 . Use the definition of a  48 . Use the one-to-one property of  49 . Use the one-to-one property of 
logarithm to find the exact logarithms to find an exact logarithms to find an exact 
solution for solution for solution for 

If there is no solution, write no If there is no solution, write no 
solution. solution. 

50 . The formula for measuring sound intensity in  51 . The population of a city is modeled by the 
decibels  is defined by the equation equation  where  is 

 where  is the intensity of the measured in years. If the city continues to grow at 
this rate, how many years will it take for the 

sound in watts per square meter and population to reach one million? 
is the lowest level of sound that the average 
person can hear. How many decibels are emitted 
from a large orchestra with a sound intensity of 

 watts per square meter? 

52 . Find the inverse function  for the exponential  53 . Find the inverse function  for the logarithmic 
function function 

Exponential and Logarithmic Models 

For the following exercises, use this scenario: A doctor prescribes  milligrams of a therapeutic drug that decays by 
about  each hour. 
54 . To the nearest minute, what is the half-life of the  55 . Write an exponential model representing the 

drug? amount of the drug remaining in the patient’s 
system after  hours. Then use the formula to find 
the amount of the drug that would remain in the 
patient’s system after  hours. Round to the 
nearest hundredth of a gram. 



658     6 • Exercises

For the following exercises, use this scenario: A soup with an internal temperature of  Fahrenheit was taken off the 
stove to cool in a  room. After fifteen minutes, the internal temperature of the soup was 
56 . Use Newton’s Law of  57 . How many minutes will it 

Cooling to write a formula take the soup to cool to 
that models this situation. 

For the following exercises, use this scenario: The equation  models the number of people in a 
school who have heard a rumor after  days. 
58 . How many people started  59 . To the nearest tenth, how  60 . What is the carrying 

the rumor? many days will it be before capacity? 
the rumor spreads to half 
the carrying capacity? 

For the following exercises, enter the data from each table into a graphing calculator and graph the resulting scatter 
plots. Determine whether the data from the table would likely represent a function that is linear, exponential, or 
logarithmic. 
61 . 62 .  63 . Find a formula for an 

x f(x) x f(x) exponential equation that 
goes through the points 

1 3.05 0.5 18.05  and  Then 
express the formula as an 

2 4.42 1 17 equivalent equation with 
base e. 

3 6.4 3 15.33 

4 9.28 5 14.55 

5 13.46 7 14.04 

6 19.52 10 13.5 

7 28.3 12 13.22 

8 41.04 13 13.1 

9 59.5 15 12.88 

10 86.28 17 12.69 

20 12.45 

Fitting Exponential Models to Data 
64 . What is the carrying capacity for a population  65 . The population of a culture of bacteria is modeled 

modeled by the logistic equation by the logistic equation 
 What is the initial population where  is in days. To the nearest tenth, how many 

for the model? days will it take the culture to reach  of its 
carrying capacity? 

Access for free at openstax.org



6 • Exercises     659

For the following exercises, use a graphing utility to create a scatter diagram of the data given in the table. Observe the 
shape of the scatter diagram to determine whether the data is best described by an exponential, logarithmic, or logistic 
model. Then use the appropriate regression feature to find an equation that models the data. When necessary, round 
values to five decimal places. 
66 .  67 . 68 . 

x f(x) x f(x) x f(x) 

1 409.4 0.15 36.21 0 9 

2 260.7 0.25 28.88 2 22.6 

3 170.4 0.5 24.39 4 44.2 

4 110.6 0.75 18.28 5 62.1 

5 74 1 16.5 7 96.9 

6 44.7 1.5 12.99 8 113.4 

7 32.4 2 9.91 10 133.4 

8 19.5 2.25 8.57 11 137.6 

9 12.7 2.75 7.23 15 148.4 

10 8.1 3 5.99 17 149.3 

3.5 4.81 

Practice Test 
1 . The population of a pod of  2 . Find an exponential  3 . Drew wants to save $2,500 

bottlenose dolphins is equation that passes to go to the next World Cup. 
modeled by the function through the points To the nearest dollar, how 

 where  is and much will he need to invest 
given in years. To the in an account now with 
nearest whole number, what  APR, compounding 
will the pod population be daily, in order to reach his 
after  years? goal in  years? 



660     6 • Exercises

4 . An investment account was  5 . Graph the function 6 . The graph shows transformations 
opened with an initial  and its of the graph of  What 
deposit of $9,600 and earns reflection across the y-axis is the equation for the 

 interest, compounded on the same axes, and give transformation? 
continuously. How much will the y-intercept. 
the account be worth after 

 years? 

7 . Rewrite  8 . Rewrite  as an  9 . Solve for  by converting the 
as an equivalent exponential equivalent logarithmic logarithmic equation 
equation. equation.  to exponential 

form. 
10 . Evaluate  11 . Evaluate  using a  12 . Graph the function 

without using a calculator. calculator. Round to the 
nearest thousandth. 

13 . State the domain, vertical  14 . Rewrite  as a  15 . Rewrite 
asymptote, and end sum. in compact form. 
behavior of the function 

16 . Rewrite  as a  17 . Use properties of 
logarithm to expand 

product. 

18 . Condense the expression  19 . Rewrite  as 
 to a single a logarithm. Then apply 

logarithm. the change of base 
formula to solve for 
using the natural log. 
Round to the nearest 
thousandth. 

20 . Solve  by rewriting each  21 . Use logarithms to find the 
side with a common base. exact solution for 

 . If 
there is no solution, write 
no solution. 

22 . Find the exact solution for  23 . Find the exact solution for  24 . Find the exact solution for 
 If there  If  If there is 

is no solution, write no there is no solution, write no solution, write no 
solution. no solution. solution. 

25 . Find the exact solution for  26 . Use the definition of a 
 If there logarithm to find the exact 

is no solution, write no solution for 
solution. 

Access for free at openstax.org



6 • Exercises     661

27 . Use the one-to-one property of logarithms to find  28 . The formula for measuring 
an exact solution for sound intensity in decibels 

 If there is no  is defined by the 
solution, write no solution. equation 

 where 
is the intensity of the 
sound in watts per square 
meter and  is 
the lowest level of sound 
that the average person 
can hear. How many 
decibels are emitted from a 
rock concert with a sound 
intensity of 
watts per square meter? 

29 . A radiation safety officer is  30 . Write the formula found in  31 . A bottle of soda with a 
working with  grams of the previous exercise as an temperature of 
a radioactive substance. equivalent equation with Fahrenheit was taken off a 
After  days, the sample base  Express the shelf and placed in a 
has decayed to  grams. exponent to five significant refrigerator with an 
Rounding to five significant digits. internal temperature of 
digits, write an exponential  After ten minutes, 
equation representing this the internal temperature of 
situation. To the nearest the soda was  Use 
day, what is the half-life of Newton’s Law of Cooling to 
this substance? write a formula that 

models this situation. To 
the nearest degree, what 
will the temperature of the 
soda be after one hour? 



662     6 • Exercises

32 . The population of a wildlife  33 . Enter the data from Table 1 34 . The population of a lake of 
habitat is modeled by the into a graphing calculator fish is modeled by the 
equation and graph the resulting logistic equation 

 where scatter plot. Determine  where 
 is given in years. How whether the data from the 

many animals were table would likely  is time in years. To the 

originally transported to represent a function that is nearest hundredth, how 

the habitat? How many linear, exponential, or many years will it take the 

years will it take before the logarithmic. lake to reach  of its 
carrying capacity? 

habitat reaches half its 
capacity? x f(x) 

1 3 

2 8.55 

3 11.79 

4 14.09 

5 15.88 

6 17.33 

7 18.57 

8 19.64 

9 20.58 

10 21.42 

Table 1 

Access for free at openstax.org



6 • Exercises     663

For the following exercises, use a graphing utility to create a scatter diagram of the data given in the table. Observe the 
shape of the scatter diagram to determine whether the data is best described by an exponential, logarithmic, or logistic 
model. Then use the appropriate regression feature to find an equation that models the data. When necessary, round 
values to five decimal places. 
35 . 36 .  37 . 

x f(x) x f(x) x f(x) 

1 20 3 13.98 0 2.2 

2 21.6 4 17.84 0.5 2.9 

3 29.2 5 20.01 1 3.9 

4 36.4 6 22.7 1.5 4.8 

5 46.6 7 24.1 2 6.4 

6 55.7 8 26.15 3 9.3 

7 72.6 9 27.37 4 12.3 

8 87.1 10 28.38 5 15 

9 107.2 11 29.97 6 16.2 

10 138.1 12 31.07 7 17.3 

13 31.43 8 17.9 



664     6 • Exercises

Access for free at openstax.org



7 • Introduction to The Unit Circle: Sine and Cosine Functions          665

7 THE UNIT CIRCLE: SINE AND COSINE 
FUNCTIONS 

The tide rises and falls at regular, predictable intervals. (credit: Andrea Schaffer, Flickr) 

Chapter Outline 
7.1 Angles 
7.2 Right Triangle Trigonometry 
7.3 Unit Circle 
7.4 The Other Trigonometric Functions 

Introduction to The Unit Circle: Sine and Cosine Functions 
Life is dense with phenomena that repeat in regular intervals. Each day, for example, the tides rise and fall in response to 
the gravitational pull of the moon. And as a result of the motion of the moon itself, the tides occur with different 
strengths. Throughout history, many Indigenous peoples have used this regularity to build cultural narratives and direct 
key activities, such as agriculture, hunting, and fishing. Aboriginal people in the Torres Strait area (the northern tip) of 
Australia used the tidal peaks to determine the best times to fish. Their elders explain that the stronger spring tides 
stirred up sediment and obscured fish vision, leaving them more likely to take in lures and resulting in a larger catch.1 

In mathematics, a function that repeats its values in regular intervals is known as a periodic function. The graphs of such 
functions show a general shape reflective of a pattern that keeps repeating. This means the graph of the function has 
the same output at exactly the same place in every cycle. And this translates to all the cycles of the function 
having exactly the same length. So, if we know all the details of one full cycle of a true periodic function, then we know 
the state of the function’s outputs at all times, future and past. In this chapter, we will investigate various examples of 
periodic functions. 

1 Hamacher, D.W., Tapim, A., Passi, S., and Barsa, J. (2018). Dancing with the stars – astronomy and music in the Torres Strait. In Imagining Other 
Worlds: Explorations in Astronomy and Culture. 



666     7 • The Unit Circle: Sine and Cosine Functions

7.1 Angles 
Learning Objectives 
In this section you will: 

Draw angles in standard position. 
Convert between degrees and radians. 
Find coterminal angles. 
Find the length of a circular arc. 
Use linear and angular speed to describe motion on a circular path. 

A golfer swings to hit a ball over a sand trap and onto the green. An airline pilot maneuvers a plane toward a narrow 
runway. A dress designer creates the latest fashion. What do they all have in common? They all work with angles, and so 
do all of us at one time or another. Sometimes we need to measure angles exactly with instruments. Other times we 
estimate them or judge them by eye. Either way, the proper angle can make the difference between success and failure 
in many undertakings. In this section, we will examine properties of angles. 

Drawing Angles in Standard Position 
Properly defining an angle first requires that we define a ray. A ray is a directed line segment. It consists of one point on 
a line and all points extending in one direction from that point. The first point is called the endpoint of the ray. We can 
refer to a specific ray by stating its endpoint and any other point on it. The ray in Figure 1 can be named as ray EF, or in 
symbol form 

Figure 1 
An angle is the union of two rays having a common endpoint. The endpoint is called the vertex of the angle, and the 
two rays are the sides of the angle. The angle in Figure 2 is formed from  and . Angles can be named using a 
point on each ray and the vertex, such as angle DEF, or in symbol form 

Figure 2 
Greek letters are often used as variables for the measure of an angle. Table 1 is a list of Greek letters commonly used to 

Access for free at openstax.org



7.1 • Angles     667

represent angles, and a sample angle is shown in Figure 3. 

 or 

theta phi alpha beta gamma 

Table 1 

Figure 3 Angle theta, shown as 
Angle creation is a dynamic process. We start with two rays lying on top of one another. We leave one fixed in place, and 
rotate the other. The fixed ray is the initial side, and the rotated ray is the terminal side. In order to identify the 
different sides, we indicate the rotation with a small arrow close to the vertex as in Figure 4. 

Figure 4 
As we discussed at the beginning of the section, there are many applications for angles, but in order to use them 
correctly, we must be able to measure them. The measure of an angle is the amount of rotation from the initial side to 
the terminal side. Probably the most familiar unit of angle measurement is the degree. One degree is  of a circular 
rotation, so a complete circular rotation contains  degrees. An angle measured in degrees should always include the 
unit “degrees” after the number, or include the degree symbol  For example, 
To formalize our work, we will begin by drawing angles on an x-y coordinate plane. Angles can occur in any position on 
the coordinate plane, but for the purpose of comparison, the convention is to illustrate them in the same position 
whenever possible. An angle is in standard position if its vertex is located at the origin, and its initial side extends along 
the positive x-axis. See Figure 5. 



668     7 • The Unit Circle: Sine and Cosine Functions

Figure 5 
If the angle is measured in a counterclockwise direction from the initial side to the terminal side, the angle is said to be a 
positive angle. If the angle is measured in a clockwise direction, the angle is said to be a negative angle. 
Drawing an angle in standard position always starts the same way—draw the initial side along the positive x-axis. To 
place the terminal side of the angle, we must calculate the fraction of a full rotation the angle represents. We do that by 
dividing the angle measure in degrees by  For example, to draw a  angle, we calculate that  So, the 
terminal side will be one-fourth of the way around the circle, moving counterclockwise from the positive x-axis. To draw a 

 angle, we calculate that  So the terminal side will be 1 complete rotation around the circle, moving 
counterclockwise from the positive x-axis. In this case, the initial side and the terminal side overlap. See Figure 6. 

Figure 6 
Since we define an angle in standard position by its terminal side, we have a special type of angle whose terminal side 
lies on an axis, a quadrantal angle. This type of angle can have a measure of 0°, 90°, 180°, 270°, or 360°. See Figure 7. 

Access for free at openstax.org



7.1 • Angles     669

Figure 7 Quadrantal angles have a terminal side that lies along an axis. Examples are shown. 

Quadrantal Angles 

An angle is a quadrantal angle if its terminal side lies on an axis, including 0°, 90°, 180°, 270°, or 360°. 

...
HOW TO 

Given an angle measure in degrees, draw the angle in standard position. 

1. Express the angle measure as a fraction of 
2. Reduce the fraction to simplest form. 
3. Draw an angle that contains that same fraction of the circle, beginning on the positive x-axis and moving 

counterclockwise for positive angles and clockwise for negative angles. 

EXAMPLE 1 

Drawing an Angle in Standard Position Measured in Degrees 
ⓐ Sketch an angle of  in standard position.  ⓑ Sketch an angle of  in standard position. 



670     7 • The Unit Circle: Sine and Cosine Functions

Solution 
ⓐ 
Divide the angle measure by 

To rewrite the fraction in a more familiar fraction, we can recognize that 

One-twelfth equals one-third of a quarter, so by dividing a quarter rotation into thirds, we can sketch a line at  as 
in Figure 8. 

Figure 8 

Access for free at openstax.org



7.1 • Angles     671

ⓑ 
Divide the angle measure by 

In this case, we can recognize that 

Three-eighths is one and one-half times a quarter, so we place a line by moving clockwise one full quarter and one-
half of another quarter, as in Figure 9. 

Figure 9 

 TRY IT #1 Show an angle of  on a circle in standard position. 

Converting Between Degrees and Radians 
Dividing a circle into 360 parts is an arbitrary choice, although it creates the familiar degree measurement. We may 
choose other ways to divide a circle. To find another unit, think of the process of drawing a circle. Imagine that you stop 
before the circle is completed. The portion that you drew is referred to as an arc. An arc may be a portion of a full circle, a 
full circle, or more than a full circle, represented by more than one full rotation. The length of the arc around an entire 
circle is called the circumference of that circle. 
The circumference of a circle is  If we divide both sides of this equation by  we create the ratio of the 
circumference, which is always  to the radius, regardless of the length of the radius. So the circumference of any circle 
is  times the length of the radius. That means that if we took a string as long as the radius and used it to 
measure consecutive lengths around the circumference, there would be room for six full string-lengths and a little more 
than a quarter of a seventh, as shown in Figure 10. 



672     7 • The Unit Circle: Sine and Cosine Functions

Figure 10 
This brings us to our new angle measure. One radian is the measure of a central angle of a circle that intercepts an arc 
equal in length to the radius of that circle. A central angle is an angle formed at the center of a circle by two radii. 
Because the total circumference equals  times the radius, a full circular rotation is  radians. 

See Figure 11. Note that when an angle is described without a specific unit, it refers to radian measure. For example, an 
angle measure of 3 indicates 3 radians. In fact, radian measure is dimensionless, since it is the quotient of a length 
(circumference) divided by a length (radius) and the length units cancel. 

Figure 11 The angle  sweeps out a measure of one radian. Note that the length of the intercepted arc is the same as the 
length of the radius of the circle. 

Relating Arc Lengths to Radius 
An arc length  is the length of the curve along the arc. Just as the full circumference of a circle always has a constant 
ratio to the radius, the arc length produced by any given angle also has a constant relation to the radius, regardless of 
the length of the radius. 
This ratio, called the radian measure, is the same regardless of the radius of the circle—it depends only on the angle. 
This property allows us to define a measure of any angle as the ratio of the arc length  to the radius r. See Figure 12. 

If  then 

Access for free at openstax.org



7.1 • Angles     673

Figure 12 (a) In an angle of 1 radian, the arc length  equals the radius  (b) An angle of 2 radians has an arc length 
 (c) A full revolution is  or about 6.28 radians. 

To elaborate on this idea, consider two circles, one with radius 2 and the other with radius 3. Recall the circumference of 
a circle is  where  is the radius. The smaller circle then has circumference  and the larger has 
circumference  Now we draw a  angle on the two circles, as in Figure 13. 

Figure 13 A  angle contains one-eighth of the circumference of a circle, regardless of the radius. 
Notice what happens if we find the ratio of the arc length divided by the radius of the circle. 

Since both ratios are  the angle measures of both circles are the same, even though the arc length and radius differ. 

Radians 

One radian is the measure of the central angle of a circle such that the length of the arc between the initial side and 
the terminal side is equal to the radius of the circle. A full revolution  equals  radians. A half revolution 
is equivalent to  radians. 

The radian measure of an angle is the ratio of the length of the arc subtended by the angle to the radius of the circle. 
In other words, if  is the length of an arc of a circle, and  is the radius of the circle, then the central angle containing 
that arc measures  radians. In a circle of radius 1, the radian measure corresponds to the length of the arc. 



674     7 • The Unit Circle: Sine and Cosine Functions

 Q&A A measure of 1 radian looks to be about  Is that correct? 

Yes. It is approximately  Because  radians equals  radian equals 

Using Radians 
Because radian measure is the ratio of two lengths, it is a unitless measure. For example, in Figure 12, suppose the 
radius were 2 inches and the distance along the arc were also 2 inches. When we calculate the radian measure of the 
angle, the “inches” cancel, and we have a result without units. Therefore, it is not necessary to write the label “radians” 
after a radian measure, and if we see an angle that is not labeled with “degrees” or the degree symbol, we can assume 
that it is a radian measure. 
Considering the most basic case, the unit circle (a circle with radius 1), we know that 1 rotation equals 360 degrees, 
We can also track one rotation around a circle by finding the circumference,  and for the unit circle 
These two different ways to rotate around a circle give us a way to convert from degrees to radians. 

Identifying Special Angles Measured in Radians 
In addition to knowing the measurements in degrees and radians of a quarter revolution, a half revolution, and a full 
revolution, there are other frequently encountered angles in one revolution of a circle with which we should be familiar. 
It is common to encounter multiples of 30, 45, 60, and 90 degrees. These values are shown in Figure 14. Memorizing 
these angles will be very useful as we study the properties associated with angles. 

Figure 14 Commonly encountered angles measured in degrees 
Now, we can list the corresponding radian values for the common measures of a circle corresponding to those listed in 
Figure 14, which are shown in Figure 15. Be sure you can verify each of these measures. 

Access for free at openstax.org



7.1 • Angles     675

Figure 15 Commonly encountered angles measured in radians 

EXAMPLE 2 

Finding a Radian Measure 
Find the radian measure of one-third of a full rotation. 

Solution 
For any circle, the arc length along such a rotation would be one-third of the circumference. We know that 

So, 

The radian measure would be the arc length divided by the radius. 

 TRY IT #2 Find the radian measure of three-fourths of a full rotation. 

Converting Between Radians and Degrees 
Because degrees and radians both measure angles, we need to be able to convert between them. We can easily do so 
using a proportion where  is the measure of the angle in degrees and  is the measure of the angle in radians. 

This proportion shows that the measure of angle  in degrees divided by 180 equals the measure of angle  in radians 
divided by  Or, phrased another way, degrees is to 180 as radians is to 



676     7 • The Unit Circle: Sine and Cosine Functions

Converting between Radians and Degrees 

To convert between degrees and radians, use the proportion 

EXAMPLE 3 

Converting Radians to Degrees 
Convert each radian measure to degrees. 

ⓐ  ⓑ 3 
Solution 

Because we are given radians and we want degrees, we should set up a proportion and solve it. 

ⓐ  We use the proportion, substituting the given information. 

ⓑ  We use the proportion, substituting the given information. 

 TRY IT #3 Convert  radians to degrees. 

EXAMPLE 4 

Converting Degrees to Radians 
Convert  degrees to radians. 

Solution 
In this example, we start with degrees and want radians, so we again set up a proportion, but we substitute the given 
information into a different part of the proportion. 

Analysis 
Another way to think about this problem is by remembering that  Because  we can find that 

 is 

 TRY IT #4 Convert  to radians. 

Access for free at openstax.org



7.1 • Angles     677

Finding Coterminal Angles 
Converting between degrees and radians can make working with angles easier in some applications. For other 
applications, we may need another type of conversion. Negative angles and angles greater than a full revolution are 
more awkward to work with than those in the range of  to  or  to  It would be convenient to replace those 
out-of-range angles with a corresponding angle within the range of a single revolution. 
It is possible for more than one angle to have the same terminal side. Look at Figure 16. The angle of  is a positive 
angle, measured counterclockwise. The angle of  is a negative angle, measured clockwise. But both angles have 
the same terminal side. If two angles in standard position have the same terminal side, they are coterminal angles. Every 
angle greater than  or less than  is coterminal with an angle between  and  and it is often more convenient 
to find the coterminal angle within the range of  to  than to work with an angle that is outside that range. 

Figure 16 An angle of  and an angle of  are coterminal angles. 
Any angle has infinitely many coterminal angles because each time we add  to that angle—or subtract  from 
it—the resulting value has a terminal side in the same location. For example,  and  are coterminal for this 
reason, as is 
An angle’s reference angle is the measure of the smallest, positive, acute angle  formed by the terminal side of the 
angle  and the horizontal axis. Thus positive reference angles have terminal sides that lie in the first quadrant and can 
be used as models for angles in other quadrants. See Figure 17 for examples of reference angles for angles in different 
quadrants. 

Figure 17 

Coterminal and Reference Angles 

Coterminal angles are two angles in standard position that have the same terminal side. 



678     7 • The Unit Circle: Sine and Cosine Functions

An angle’s reference angle is the size of the smallest acute angle,  formed by the terminal side of the angle  and 
the horizontal axis. 

...
HOW TO 

Given an angle greater than  find a coterminal angle between  and 

1. Subtract  from the given angle. 
2. If the result is still greater than  subtract  again till the result is between  and 
3. The resulting angle is coterminal with the original angle. 

EXAMPLE 5 

Finding an Angle Coterminal with an Angle of Measure Greater Than 
Find the least positive angle  that is coterminal with an angle measuring  where 

Solution 
An angle with measure  is coterminal with an angle with measure  but  is still greater than 

 so we subtract  again to find another coterminal angle: 
The angle  is coterminal with  To put it another way,  equals  plus two full rotations, as shown in 
Figure 18. 

Figure 18 

 TRY IT #5 Find an angle  that is coterminal with an angle measuring  where 

...
HOW TO 

Given an angle with measure less than  find a coterminal angle having a measure between  and 

1. Add  to the given angle. 
2. If the result is still less than  add  again until the result is between  and 
3. The resulting angle is coterminal with the original angle. 

Access for free at openstax.org



7.1 • Angles     679

EXAMPLE 6 

Finding an Angle Coterminal with an Angle Measuring Less Than 
Show the angle with measure  on a circle and find a positive coterminal angle  such that 

Solution 
Since  is half of  we can start at the positive horizontal axis and measure clockwise half of a  angle. 
Because we can find coterminal angles by adding or subtracting a full rotation of  we can find a positive coterminal 
angle here by adding 

We can then show the angle on a circle, as in Figure 19. 

Figure 19 

 TRY IT #6 Find an angle  that is coterminal with an angle measuring  such that 

Finding Coterminal Angles Measured in Radians 
We can find coterminal angles measured in radians in much the same way as we have found them using degrees. In 
both cases, we find coterminal angles by adding or subtracting one or more full rotations. 

...
HOW TO 

Given an angle greater than  find a coterminal angle between 0 and 

1. Subtract  from the given angle. 
2. If the result is still greater than  subtract  again until the result is between  and 
3. The resulting angle is coterminal with the original angle. 

EXAMPLE 7 

Finding Coterminal Angles Using Radians 
Find an angle  that is coterminal with  where 

Solution 
When working in degrees, we found coterminal angles by adding or subtracting 360 degrees, a full rotation. Likewise, in 
radians, we can find coterminal angles by adding or subtracting full rotations of  radians: 

The angle  is coterminal, but not less than  so we subtract another rotation. 



680     7 • The Unit Circle: Sine and Cosine Functions

The angle  is coterminal with  as shown in Figure 20. 

Figure 20 

 TRY IT #7 Find an angle of measure  that is coterminal with an angle of measure  where 

Determining the Length of an Arc 
Recall that the radian measure  of an angle was defined as the ratio of the arc length  of a circular arc to the radius  of 
the circle,  From this relationship, we can find arc length along a circle, given an angle. 

Arc Length on a Circle 

In a circle of radius r, the length of an arc  subtended by an angle with measure  in radians, shown in Figure 21, is 

Figure 21 

...
HOW TO 

Given a circle of radius  calculate the length  of the arc subtended by a given angle of measure 

1. If necessary, convert  to radians. 

Access for free at openstax.org



7.1 • Angles     681

2. Multiply the radius 

EXAMPLE 8 

Finding the Length of an Arc 
Assume the orbit of Mercury around the sun is a perfect circle. Mercury is approximately 36 million miles from the sun. 

ⓐ  In one Earth day, Mercury completes 0.0114 of its total revolution. How many miles does it travel in one day? 
ⓑ  Use your answer from part (a) to determine the radian measure for Mercury’s movement in one Earth day. 

Solution 
ⓐ Let’s begin by finding the circumference of Mercury’s orbit. 

Since Mercury completes 0.0114 of its total revolution in one Earth day, we can now find the distance traveled. 

ⓑ Now, we convert to radians. 

 TRY IT #8 Find the arc length along a circle of radius 10 units subtended by an angle of 

Finding the Area of a Sector of a Circle 
In addition to arc length, we can also use angles to find the area of a sector of a circle. A sector is a region of a circle 
bounded by two radii and the intercepted arc, like a slice of pizza or pie. Recall that the area of a circle with radius  can 
be found using the formula  If the two radii form an angle of  measured in radians, then  is the ratio of the 
angle measure to the measure of a full rotation and is also, therefore, the ratio of the area of the sector to the area of 
the circle. Thus, the area of a sector is the fraction  multiplied by the entire area. (Always remember that this formula 
only applies if  is in radians.) 

Area of a Sector 

The area of a sector of a circle with radius  subtended by an angle  measured in radians, is 

See Figure 22. 



682     7 • The Unit Circle: Sine and Cosine Functions

Figure 22 The area of the sector equals half the square of the radius times the central angle measured in radians. 

...
HOW TO 

Given a circle of radius  find the area of a sector defined by a given angle 

1. If necessary, convert  to radians. 
2. Multiply half the radian measure of  by the square of the radius ​

EXAMPLE 9 

Finding the Area of a Sector 
An automatic lawn sprinkler sprays a distance of 20 feet while rotating 30 degrees, as shown in Figure 23. What is the 
area of the sector of grass the sprinkler waters? 

Figure 23 The sprinkler sprays 20 ft within an arc of 

Solution 
First, we need to convert the angle measure into radians. Because 30 degrees is one of our special angles, we already 
know the equivalent radian measure, but we can also convert: 

The area of the sector is then 

So the area is about 

Access for free at openstax.org



7.1 • Angles     683

 TRY IT #9 In central pivot irrigation, which creates the field shapes similar to the image at the beginning of 
Equations and Inequalities, a large irrigation pipe on wheels rotates around a center point. A 
farmer has a central pivot system with a radius of 400 meters. If water restrictions only allow her 
to water 150 thousand square meters a day, what angle should she set the system to cover? Write 
the answer in radian measure to two decimal places. 

Use Linear and Angular Speed to Describe Motion on a Circular Path 
In addition to finding the area of a sector, we can use angles to describe the speed of a moving object. An object 
traveling in a circular path has two types of speed. Linear speed is speed along a straight path and can be determined 
by the distance it moves along (its displacement) in a given time interval. For instance, if a wheel with radius 5 inches 
rotates once a second, a point on the edge of the wheel moves a distance equal to the circumference, or  inches, 
every second. So the linear speed of the point is  in./s. The equation for linear speed is as follows where  is linear 
speed,  is displacement, and  is time. 

Angular speed results from circular motion and can be determined by the angle through which a point rotates in a given 
time interval. In other words, angular speed is angular rotation per unit time. So, for instance, if a gear makes a full 
rotation every 4 seconds, we can calculate its angular speed as  90 degrees per second. Angular speed can 
be given in radians per second, rotations per minute, or degrees per hour for example. The equation for angular speed 
is as follows, where  (read as omega) is angular speed,  is the angle traversed, and  is time. 

Combining the definition of angular speed with the arc length equation,  we can find a relationship between 
angular and linear speeds. The angular speed equation can be solved for  giving  Substituting this into the arc 
length equation gives: 

Substituting this into the linear speed equation gives: 

Angular and Linear Speed 

As a point moves along a circle of radius  its angular speed,  is the angular rotation  per unit time, 

The linear speed,  of the point can be found as the distance traveled, arc length  per unit time, 

When the angular speed is measured in radians per unit time, linear speed and angular speed are related by the 
equation 

This equation states that the angular speed in radians,  representing the amount of rotation occurring in a unit of 
time, can be multiplied by the radius  to calculate the total arc length traveled in a unit of time, which is the definition 
of linear speed. 



684     7 • The Unit Circle: Sine and Cosine Functions

...
HOW TO 

Given the amount of angle rotation and the time elapsed, calculate the angular speed. 

1. If necessary, convert the angle measure to radians. 
2. Divide the angle in radians by the number of time units elapsed: 
3. The resulting speed will be in radians per time unit. 

Water wheels have been used for thousands of years to transfer the power of flowing water to other devices. The image 
below depicts the design of the the 3rd century Roman water wheel in Hierapolis, a city in what is now Turkey. Water 
turned the wheel, which in turn rotated a crank connected to two saws used to cut blocks. These design elements were 
used in water wheel applications throughout the world, and even provided the underlying principle for the steam 
engine, invented about 1500 years later. 

EXAMPLE 10 

Finding Angular Speed 
A water wheel, shown in Figure 24, completes 1 rotation every 5 seconds. Find the angular speed in radians per second. 

Figure 24 

Solution 
The wheel completes 1 rotation, or passes through an angle of  radians in 5 seconds, so the angular speed would be 

 radians per second. 

 TRY IT #10 A vintage vinyl record is played on a turntable rotating clockwise at a rate of 45 rotations per 
minute. Find the angular speed in radians per second. 

...
HOW TO 

Given the radius of a circle, an angle of rotation, and a length of elapsed time, determine the linear speed. 

1. Convert the total rotation to radians if necessary. 
2. Divide the total rotation in radians by the elapsed time to find the angular speed: apply 

Access for free at openstax.org



7.1 • Angles     685

3. Multiply the angular speed by the length of the radius to find the linear speed, expressed in terms of the length 
unit used for the radius and the time unit used for the elapsed time: apply 

EXAMPLE 11 

Finding a Linear Speed 
A bicycle has wheels 28 inches in diameter. A tachometer determines the wheels are rotating at 180 RPM (revolutions per 
minute). Find the speed the bicycle is traveling down the road. 

Solution 
Here, we have an angular speed and need to find the corresponding linear speed, since the linear speed of the outside 
of the tires is the speed at which the bicycle travels down the road. 
We begin by converting from rotations per minute to radians per minute. It can be helpful to utilize the units to make 
this conversion: 

Using the formula from above along with the radius of the wheels, we can find the linear speed: 

Remember that radians are a unitless measure, so it is not necessary to include them. 
Finally, we may wish to convert this linear speed into a more familiar measurement, like miles per hour. 

 TRY IT #11 A satellite is rotating around Earth at 0.25 radian per hour at an altitude of 242 km above Earth. If 
the radius of Earth is 6378 kilometers, find the linear speed of the satellite in kilometers per hour. 

 MEDIA 

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with angles, arc length, and areas of sectors. 

Angles in Standard Position (https://openstax.org/l/standardpos) 
Angle of Rotation (https://openstax.org/l/angleofrotation) 
Coterminal Angles (https://openstax.org/l/coterminal) 
Determining Coterminal Angles (https://openstax.org/l/detcoterm) 
Positive and Negative Coterminal Angles (https://openstax.org/l/posnegcoterm) 
Radian Measure (https://openstax.org/l/radianmeas) 
Coterminal Angles in Radians (https://openstax.org/l/cotermrad) 
Arc Length and Area of a Sector (https://openstax.org/l/arclength) 

 7.1 SECTION EXERCISES 
Verbal 

1 . Draw an angle in standard 2 . Explain why there are an  3 . State what a positive or 
position. Label the vertex, infinite number of angles negative angle signifies, and 
initial side, and terminal that are coterminal to a explain how to draw each. 
side. certain angle. 



686     7 • The Unit Circle: Sine and Cosine Functions

4 . How does radian measure  5 . Explain the differences 
of an angle compare to the between linear speed and 
degree measure? Include an angular speed when 
explanation of 1 radian in describing motion along a 
your paragraph. circular path. 

Graphical 

For the following exercises, draw an angle in standard position with the given measure. 
6 .  7 . 8 . 

9 . 10 .  11 . 

12 .  13 . 14 . 

15 . 16 . 

For the following exercises, draw an angle in standard position with the given measure as well as a coterminal angle. 

17 . 18 . 19 . 

20 .  21 . 

For the following exercises, refer to Figure 25. Round to two decimal places. 

Figure 25 
22 . Find the arc length.  23 . Find the area of the sector. 

Access for free at openstax.org



7.1 • Angles     687

For the following exercises, refer to Figure 26. Round to two decimal places. 

Figure 26 
24 . Find the arc length.  25 . Find the area of the sector. 

Algebraic 

For the following exercises, convert angles in radians to degrees. 

26 .  radians  27 .  radians  28 .  radians 

29 .  radians  30 .  radians  31 .  radians 

32 .  radians 

For the following exercises, convert angles in degrees to radians. 
33 .  34 .  35 . 
36 .  37 .  38 . 
39 . 

For the following exercises, use the given information to find the length of a circular arc. Round to two decimal places. 
40 . Find the length of the arc  41 . Find the length of the arc  42 . Find the length of the arc 

of a circle of radius 12 of a circle of radius 5.02 of a circle of diameter 14 
inches subtended by a miles subtended by the meters subtended by the 
central angle of  radians. central angle of central angle of 

43 . Find the length of the arc  44 . Find the length of the arc  45 . Find the length of the arc 
of a circle of radius 10 of a circle of radius 5 of a circle of diameter 12 
centimeters subtended by inches subtended by the meters subtended by the 
the central angle of central angle of central angle is 

For the following exercises, use the given information to find the area of the sector. Round to four decimal places. 
46 . A sector of a circle has a  47 . A sector of a circle has a  48 . A sector of a circle with 

central angle of  and a central angle of  and a diameter 10 feet and an 
radius 6 cm. radius of 20 cm. angle of  radians. 

49 . A sector of a circle with 
radius of 0.7 inches and an 
angle of  radians. 



688     7 • The Unit Circle: Sine and Cosine Functions

For the following exercises, find the angle between  and  that is coterminal to the given angle. 
50 .  51 . 52 . 
53 . 

For the following exercises, find the angle between 0 and  in radians that is coterminal to the given angle. 

54 .  55 .  56 . 

57 . 

Real-World Applications 

58 . A truck with 32-inch  59 . A bicycle with 24-inch  60 . A wheel of radius 8 inches 
diameter wheels is diameter wheels is is rotating 15°/s. What is 
traveling at 60 mi/h. Find traveling at 15 mi/h. Find the linear speed  the 
the angular speed of the the angular speed of the angular speed in RPM, and 
wheels in rad/min. How wheels in rad/min. How the angular speed in rad/s? 
many revolutions per many revolutions per 
minute do the wheels minute do the wheels 
make? make? 

61 . A wheel of radius  inches  62 . A computer hard drive disc  63 . When being burned in a 
is rotating  rad/s. What has diameter of 120 writable CD-R drive, the 
is the linear speed  the millimeters. When playing angular speed of a CD is 
angular speed in RPM, and audio, the angular speed often much faster than 
the angular speed in deg/ varies to keep the linear when playing audio, but 
s? speed constant where the the angular speed still 

disc is being read. When varies to keep the linear 
reading along the outer speed constant where the 
edge of the disc, the disc is being written. When 
angular speed is about 200 writing along the outer 
RPM (revolutions per edge of the disc, the 
minute). Find the linear angular speed of one drive 
speed. is about 4800 RPM 

(revolutions per minute). 
Find the linear speed if the 
CD has diameter of 120 
millimeters. 

64 . A person is standing on the  65 . Find the distance along an  66 . Find the distance along an 
equator of Earth (radius arc on the surface of Earth arc on the surface of Earth 
3960 miles). What are their that subtends a central that subtends a central 
linear and angular speeds? angle of 5 minutes angle of 7 minutes 

. . 
The radius of Earth is 3960 The radius of Earth is 
miles. miles. 

67 . Consider a clock with an 
hour hand and minute 
hand. What is the measure 
of the angle the minute 
hand traces in  minutes? 

Access for free at openstax.org



7.2 • Right Triangle Trigonometry     689

Extensions 

68 . Two cities have the same  69 . A city is located at 40  70 . A city is located at 75 
longitude. The latitude of degrees north latitude. degrees north latitude. 
city A is 9 degrees north Assume the radius of the Assume the radius of the 
and the latitude of city B is earth is 3960 miles and the earth is 3960 miles and the 
30 degrees north. Assume earth rotates once every 24 earth rotates once every 24 
the radius of the earth is hours. Find the linear hours. Find the linear 
3960 miles. Find the speed of a person who speed of a person who 
distance between the two resides in this city. resides in this city. 
cities. 

71 . Find the linear speed of the  72 . A bicycle has wheels 28  73 . A car travels 3 miles. Its 
moon if the average inches in diameter. A tires make 2640 
distance between the earth tachometer determines revolutions. What is the 
and moon is 239,000 miles, that the wheels are radius of a tire in inches? 
assuming the orbit of the rotating at 180 RPM 
moon is circular and (revolutions per minute). 
requires about 28 days. Find the speed the bicycle 
Express answer in miles is travelling down the road. 
per hour. 

74 . A wheel on a tractor has a 
24-inch diameter. How 
many revolutions does the 
wheel make if the tractor 
travels 4 miles? 

7.2 Right Triangle Trigonometry 
Learning Objectives 
In this section you will: 

Use right triangles to evaluate trigonometric functions. 
Find function values for  and 
Use equal cofunctions of complementary angles. 
Use the definitions of trigonometric functions of any angle. 
Use right-triangle trigonometry to solve applied problems. 

Mt. Everest, which straddles the border between China and Nepal, is the tallest mountain in the world. Measuring its 
height is no easy task. In fact, the actual measurement has been a source of controversy for hundreds of years. The 
measurement process involves the use of triangles and a branch of mathematics known as trigonometry. In this section, 
we will define a new group of functions known as trigonometric functions, and find out how they can be used to 
measure heights, such as those of the tallest mountains. 

Using Right Triangles to Evaluate Trigonometric Functions 
Figure 1 shows a right triangle with a vertical side of length  and a horizontal side has length  Notice that the triangle 
is inscribed in a circle of radius 1. Such a circle, with a center at the origin and a radius of 1, is known as a unit circle. 

Figure 1 
We can define the trigonometric functions in terms an angle t and the lengths of the sides of the triangle. The adjacent 
side is the side closest to the angle, x. (Adjacent means “next to.”) The opposite side is the side across from the angle, y. 



690     7 • The Unit Circle: Sine and Cosine Functions

The hypotenuse is the side of the triangle opposite the right angle, 1. These sides are labeled in Figure 2. 

Figure 2 The sides of a right triangle in relation to angle 
Given a right triangle with an acute angle of  the first three trigonometric functions are listed. 

A common mnemonic for remembering these relationships is SohCahToa, formed from the first letters of “Sine is 
opposite over hypotenuse, Cosine is adjacent over hypotenuse, Tangent is opposite over adjacent.” 
For the triangle shown in Figure 1, we have the following. 

...
HOW TO 

Given the side lengths of a right triangle and one of the acute angles, find the sine, cosine, and tangent of that 
angle. 

1. Find the sine as the ratio of the opposite side to the hypotenuse. 
2. Find the cosine as the ratio of the adjacent side to the hypotenuse. 
3. Find the tangent as the ratio of the opposite side to the adjacent side. 

EXAMPLE 1 

Evaluating a Trigonometric Function of a Right Triangle 
Given the triangle shown in Figure 3, find the value of 

Figure 3 

Solution 
The side adjacent to the angle is 15, and the hypotenuse of the triangle is 17. 

Access for free at openstax.org



7.2 • Right Triangle Trigonometry     691

 TRY IT #1 Given the triangle shown in Figure 4, find the value of 

Figure 4 

Reciprocal Functions 
In addition to sine, cosine, and tangent, there are three more functions. These too are defined in terms of the sides of 
the triangle. 

Take another look at these definitions. These functions are the reciprocals of the first three functions. 

When working with right triangles, keep in mind that the same rules apply regardless of the orientation of the triangle. 
In fact, we can evaluate the six trigonometric functions of either of the two acute angles in the triangle in Figure 5. The 
side opposite one acute angle is the side adjacent to the other acute angle, and vice versa. 

Figure 5 The side adjacent to one angle is opposite the other angle. 
Many problems ask for all six trigonometric functions for a given angle in a triangle. A possible strategy to use is to find 
the sine, cosine, and tangent of the angles first. Then, find the other trigonometric functions easily using the reciprocals. 

...
HOW TO 

Given the side lengths of a right triangle, evaluate the six trigonometric functions of one of the acute angles. 

1. If needed, draw the right triangle and label the angle provided. 
2. Identify the angle, the adjacent side, the side opposite the angle, and the hypotenuse of the right triangle. 
3. Find the required function: 

◦ sine as the ratio of the opposite side to the hypotenuse 
◦ cosine as the ratio of the adjacent side to the hypotenuse 
◦ tangent as the ratio of the opposite side to the adjacent side 
◦ secant as the ratio of the hypotenuse to the adjacent side 
◦ cosecant as the ratio of the hypotenuse to the opposite side 
◦ cotangent as the ratio of the adjacent side to the opposite side 



692     7 • The Unit Circle: Sine and Cosine Functions

EXAMPLE 2 

Evaluating Trigonometric Functions of Angles Not in Standard Position 
Using the triangle shown in Figure 6, evaluate 

Figure 6 

Solution 

Analysis 
Another approach would have been to find sine, cosine, and tangent first. Then find their reciprocals to determine the 
other functions. 

 TRY IT #2 Using the triangle shown in Figure 7,evaluate 

Figure 7 

Finding Trigonometric Functions of Special Angles Using Side Lengths 
It is helpful to evaluate the trigonometric functions as they relate to the special angles—multiples of  and 
Remember, however, that when dealing with right triangles, we are limited to angles between 
Suppose we have a  triangle, which can also be described as a  triangle. The sides have lengths in 
the relation  The sides of a  triangle, which can also be described as a  triangle, have 

Access for free at openstax.org



7.2 • Right Triangle Trigonometry     693

lengths in the relation  These relations are shown in Figure 8. 

Figure 8 Side lengths of special triangles 
We can then use the ratios of the side lengths to evaluate trigonometric functions of special angles. 

...
HOW TO 

Given trigonometric functions of a special angle, evaluate using side lengths. 

1. Use the side lengths shown in Figure 8 for the special angle you wish to evaluate. 
2. Use the ratio of side lengths appropriate to the function you wish to evaluate. 

EXAMPLE 3 

Evaluating Trigonometric Functions of Special Angles Using Side Lengths 
Find the exact value of the trigonometric functions of  using side lengths. 

Solution 

 TRY IT #3 Find the exact value of the trigonometric functions of  using side lengths. 

Using Equal Cofunction of Complements 
If we look more closely at the relationship between the sine and cosine of the special angles, we notice a pattern. In a 
right triangle with angles of  and  we see that the sine of  namely  is also the cosine of  while the sine of 
namely  is also the cosine of 



694     7 • The Unit Circle: Sine and Cosine Functions

See Figure 9. 

Figure 9 The sine of  equals the cosine of  and vice versa. 

This result should not be surprising because, as we see from Figure 9, the side opposite the angle of  is also the side 
adjacent to  so  and  are exactly the same ratio of the same two sides,  and  Similarly, 
and  are also the same ratio using the same two sides,  and 

The interrelationship between the sines and cosines of  and  also holds for the two acute angles in any right triangle, 
since in every case, the ratio of the same two sides would constitute the sine of one angle and the cosine of the other. 
Since the three angles of a triangle add to  and the right angle is  the remaining two angles must also add up to 
That means that a right triangle can be formed with any two angles that add to  —in other words, any two 
complementary angles. So we may state a cofunction identity: If any two angles are complementary, the sine of one is 
the cosine of the other, and vice versa. This identity is illustrated in Figure 10. 

Figure 10 Cofunction identity of sine and cosine of complementary angles 

Using this identity, we can state without calculating, for instance, that the sine of  equals the cosine of  and that 
the sine of  equals the cosine of  We can also state that if, for a given angle  then  as 
well. 

Cofunction Identities 

The cofunction identities in radians are listed in Table 1. 

Access for free at openstax.org



7.2 • Right Triangle Trigonometry     695

Table 1 

...
HOW TO 

Given the sine and cosine of an angle, find the sine or cosine of its complement. 

1. To find the sine of the complementary angle, find the cosine of the original angle. 
2. To find the cosine of the complementary angle, find the sine of the original angle. 

EXAMPLE 4 

Using Cofunction Identities 
If  find 

Solution 
According to the cofunction identities for sine and cosine, we have the following. 

So 

 TRY IT #4 If  find 

Using Trigonometric Functions 
In previous examples, we evaluated the sine and cosine in triangles where we knew all three sides. But the real power of 
right-triangle trigonometry emerges when we look at triangles in which we know an angle but do not know all the sides. 

...
HOW TO 

Given a right triangle, the length of one side, and the measure of one acute angle, find the remaining sides. 

1. For each side, select the trigonometric function that has the unknown side as either the numerator or the 
denominator. The known side will in turn be the denominator or the numerator. 

2. Write an equation setting the function value of the known angle equal to the ratio of the corresponding sides. 
3. Using the value of the trigonometric function and the known side length, solve for the missing side length. 



696     7 • The Unit Circle: Sine and Cosine Functions

EXAMPLE 5 

Finding Missing Side Lengths Using Trigonometric Ratios 
Find the unknown sides of the triangle in Figure 11. 

Figure 11 

Solution 
We know the angle and the opposite side, so we can use the tangent to find the adjacent side. 

We rearrange to solve for 

We can use the sine to find the hypotenuse. 

Again, we rearrange to solve for 

 TRY IT #5 A right triangle has one angle of  and a hypotenuse of 20. Find the unknown sides and angle of 
the triangle. 

Using Right Triangle Trigonometry to Solve Applied Problems 
Right-triangle trigonometry has many practical applications. For example, the ability to compute the lengths of sides of a 
triangle makes it possible to find the height of a tall object without climbing to the top or having to extend a tape 
measure along its height. We do so by measuring a distance from the base of the object to a point on the ground some 
distance away, where we can look up to the top of the tall object at an angle. The angle of elevation of an object above 
an observer relative to the observer is the angle between the horizontal and the line from the object to the observer's 
eye. The right triangle this position creates has sides that represent the unknown height, the measured distance from 
the base, and the angled line of sight from the ground to the top of the object. Knowing the measured distance to the 
base of the object and the angle of the line of sight, we can use trigonometric functions to calculate the unknown height. 
Similarly, we can form a triangle from the top of a tall object by looking downward. The angle of depression of an object 
below an observer relative to the observer is the angle between the horizontal and the line from the object to the 
observer's eye. See Figure 12. 

Access for free at openstax.org



7.2 • Right Triangle Trigonometry     697

Figure 12 
...

HOW TO 

Given a tall object, measure its height indirectly. 

1. Make a sketch of the problem situation to keep track of known and unknown information. 
2. Lay out a measured distance from the base of the object to a point where the top of the object is clearly visible. 
3. At the other end of the measured distance, look up to the top of the object. Measure the angle the line of sight 

makes with the horizontal. 
4. Write an equation relating the unknown height, the measured distance, and the tangent of the angle of the line 

of sight. 
5. Solve the equation for the unknown height. 

EXAMPLE 6 

Measuring a Distance Indirectly 
To find the height of a tree, a person walks to a point 30 feet from the base of the tree. She measures an angle of 
between a line of sight to the top of the tree and the ground, as shown in Figure 13. Find the height of the tree. 

Figure 13 

Solution 
We know that the angle of elevation is  and the adjacent side is 30 ft long. The opposite side is the unknown height. 
The trigonometric function relating the side opposite to an angle and the side adjacent to the angle is the tangent. So we 
will state our information in terms of the tangent of  letting  be the unknown height. 

The tree is approximately 46 feet tall. 



698     7 • The Unit Circle: Sine and Cosine Functions

 TRY IT #6 How long a ladder is needed to reach a windowsill 50 feet above the ground if the ladder rests 
against the building making an angle of  with the ground? Round to the nearest foot. 

 MEDIA 

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with right triangle trigonometry. 

Finding Trig Functions on Calculator (https://openstax.org/l/findtrigcal) 
Finding Trig Functions Using a Right Triangle (https://openstax.org/l/trigrttri) 
Relate Trig Functions to Sides of a Right Triangle (https://openstax.org/l/reltrigtri) 
Determine Six Trig Functions from a Triangle (https://openstax.org/l/sixtrigfunc) 
Determine Length of Right Triangle Side (https://openstax.org/l/rttriside) 

 7.2 SECTION EXERCISES 
Verbal 

1 . For the given right triangle, label the adjacent side, 2 . When a right triangle with a hypotenuse of 1 is 
opposite side, and hypotenuse for the indicated placed in a circle of radius 1, which sides of the 
angle. triangle correspond to the x- and y-coordinates? 

3 . The tangent of an angle  4 . What is the relationship  5 . Explain the cofunction 
compares which sides of the between the two acute identity. 
right triangle? angles in a right triangle? 

Algebraic 

For the following exercises, use cofunctions of complementary angles. 
6 . 7 .  8 . 

9 . 

For the following exercises, find the lengths of the missing sides if side  is opposite angle  side  is opposite angle 
and side  is the hypotenuse. 

10 .  11 .  12 . 

13 .  14 .  15 . 

16 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



7.2 • Right Triangle Trigonometry     699

Graphical 

For the following exercises, use Figure 14 to evaluate each trigonometric function of angle 

Figure 14 
17 .  18 .  19 . 
20 .  21 .  22 . 

For the following exercises, use Figure 15 to evaluate each trigonometric function of angle 

Figure 15 
23 .  24 .  25 . 
26 .  27 .  28 . 

For the following exercises, solve for the unknown sides of the given triangle. 
29 .  30 . 31 . 



700     7 • The Unit Circle: Sine and Cosine Functions

Technology 

For the following exercises, use a calculator to find the length of each side to four decimal places. 
32 .  33 .  34 . 

35 .  36 . 

37 .  38 .  39 . 
40 .  41 . 

Extensions 

42 . Find 43 . Find 44 . Find 

45 . Find 46 . A radio tower is located  47 . A radio tower is located 
400 feet from a building. 325 feet from a building. 
From a window in the From a window in the 
building, a person building, a person 
determines that the angle determines that the angle 
of elevation to the top of of elevation to the top of 
the tower is  and that the tower is  and that 
the angle of depression to the angle of depression to 
the bottom of the tower is the bottom of the tower is 

 How tall is the tower?  How tall is the tower? 
48 . A 200-foot tall monument  49 . A 400-foot tall monument  50 . There is an antenna on the 

is located in the distance. is located in the distance. top of a building. From a 
From a window in a From a window in a location 300 feet from the 
building, a person building, a person base of the building, the 
determines that the angle determines that the angle angle of elevation to the 
of elevation to the top of of elevation to the top of top of the building is 
the monument is  and the monument is  and measured to be  From 
that the angle of that the angle of the same location, the 
depression to the bottom depression to the bottom angle of elevation to the 
of the monument is of the monument is top of the antenna is 
How far is the person from How far is the person from measured to be  Find 
the monument? the monument? the height of the antenna. 

Access for free at openstax.org



7.3 • Unit Circle     701

51 . There is lightning rod on 
the top of a building. From 
a location 500 feet from 
the base of the building, 
the angle of elevation to 
the top of the building is 
measured to be  From 
the same location, the 
angle of elevation to the 
top of the lightning rod is 
measured to be  Find 
the height of the lightning 
rod. 

Real-World Applications 

52 . A 33-ft ladder leans against  53 . A 23-ft ladder leans against  54 . The angle of elevation to 
a building so that the angle a building so that the angle the top of a building in 
between the ground and between the ground and Charlotte is found to be 9 
the ladder is  How high the ladder is  How high degrees from the ground 
does the ladder reach up does the ladder reach up at a distance of 1 mile from 
the side of the building? the side of the building? the base of the building. 

Using this information, find 
the height of the building. 

55 . The angle of elevation to  56 . Assuming that a 370-foot 
the top of a building in tall giant redwood grows 
Seattle is found to be 2 vertically, if I walk a certain 
degrees from the ground distance from the tree and 
at a distance of 2 miles measure the angle of 
from the base of the elevation to the top of the 
building. Using this tree to be  how far 
information, find the from the base of the tree 
height of the building. am I? 

7.3 Unit Circle 
Learning Objectives 
In this section you will: 

Find function values for the sine and cosine of  and 
Identify the domain and range of sine and cosine functions. 
Find reference angles. 
Use reference angles to evaluate trigonometric functions. 

Figure 1 The Singapore Flyer was the world’s tallest Ferris wheel until being overtaken by the High Roller in Las Vegas 



702     7 • The Unit Circle: Sine and Cosine Functions

and the Ain Dubai in Dubai. (credit: ʺVibin JKʺ/Flickr) 
Looking for a thrill? Then consider a ride on the Ain Dubai, the world's tallest Ferris wheel. Located in Dubai, the most 
populous city and the financial and tourism hub of the United Arab Emirates, the wheel soars to 820 feet, about 1.5 
tenths of a mile. Described as an observation wheel, riders enjoy spectacular views of the Burj Khalifa (the world's tallest 
building) and the Palm Jumeirah (a human-made archipelago home to over 10,000 people and 20 resorts) as they travel 
from the ground to the peak and down again in a repeating pattern. In this section, we will examine this type of 
revolving motion around a circle. To do so, we need to define the type of circle first, and then place that circle on a 
coordinate system. Then we can discuss circular motion in terms of the coordinate pairs. 

Finding Trigonometric Functions Using the Unit Circle 
We have already defined the trigonometric functions in terms of right triangles. In this section, we will redefine them in 
terms of the unit circle. Recall that a unit circle is a circle centered at the origin with radius 1, as shown in Figure 2. The 
angle (in radians) that  intercepts forms an arc of length  Using the formula  and knowing that  we see 
that for a unit circle, 
The x- and y-axes divide the coordinate plane into four quarters called quadrants. We label these quadrants to mimic the 
direction a positive angle would sweep. The four quadrants are labeled I, II, III, and IV. 
For any angle  we can label the intersection of the terminal side and the unit circle as by its coordinates,  The 
coordinates  and  will be the outputs of the trigonometric functions  and  respectively. This 
means  and 

Figure 2 Unit circle where the central angle is  radians 

Unit Circle 

A unit circle has a center at  and radius  In a unit circle, the length of the intercepted arc is equal to the radian 
measure of the central angle 

Let  be the endpoint on the unit circle of an arc of arc length  The  coordinates of this point can be 
described as functions of the angle. 

Defining Sine and Cosine Functions from the Unit Circle 
The sine function relates a real number  to the y-coordinate of the point where the corresponding angle intercepts the 
unit circle. More precisely, the sine of an angle  equals the y-value of the endpoint on the unit circle of an arc of length 
In Figure 2, the sine is equal to  Like all functions, the sine function has an input and an output. Its input is the 
measure of the angle; its output is the y-coordinate of the corresponding point on the unit circle. 
The cosine function of an angle  equals the x-value of the endpoint on the unit circle of an arc of length  In Figure 3, 
the cosine is equal to 

Access for free at openstax.org



7.3 • Unit Circle     703

Figure 3 
Because it is understood that sine and cosine are functions, we do not always need to write them with parentheses: 
is the same as  and  is the same as  Likewise,  is a commonly used shorthand notation for 
Be aware that many calculators and computers do not recognize the shorthand notation. When in doubt, use the extra 
parentheses when entering calculations into a calculator or computer. 

Sine and Cosine Functions 

If  is a real number and a point  on the unit circle corresponds to a central angle  then 

...
HOW TO 

Given a point P  on the unit circle corresponding to an angle of  find the sine and cosine. 

1. The sine of  is equal to the y-coordinate of point 
2. The cosine of  is equal to the x-coordinate of point 

EXAMPLE 1 

Finding Function Values for Sine and Cosine 
Point  is a point on the unit circle corresponding to an angle of  as shown in Figure 4. Find  and 

Figure 4 

Solution 



704     7 • The Unit Circle: Sine and Cosine Functions

We know that  is the x-coordinate of the corresponding point on the unit circle and  is the y-coordinate of the 
corresponding point on the unit circle. So: 

 TRY IT #1 A certain angle  corresponds to a point on the unit circle at  as shown in Figure 5. 

Find  and 

Figure 5 

Finding Sines and Cosines of Angles on an Axis 
For quadrantral angles, the corresponding point on the unit circle falls on the x- or y-axis. In that case, we can easily 
calculate cosine and sine from the values of  and 

EXAMPLE 2 

Calculating Sines and Cosines along an Axis 
Find  and 

Solution 
Moving  counterclockwise around the unit circle from the positive x-axis brings us to the top of the circle, where the 

 coordinates are  as shown in Figure 6. 

Access for free at openstax.org



7.3 • Unit Circle     705

Figure 6 
We can then use our definitions of cosine and sine. 

The cosine of  is 0; the sine of  is 1. 

 TRY IT #2 Find cosine and sine of the angle 

The Pythagorean Identity 
Now that we can define sine and cosine, we will learn how they relate to each other and the unit circle. Recall that the 
equation for the unit circle is  Because  and  we can substitute for  and  to get 

 This equation,  is known as the Pythagorean Identity. See Figure 7. 

Figure 7 
We can use the Pythagorean Identity to find the cosine of an angle if we know the sine, or vice versa. However, because 
the equation yields two solutions, we need additional knowledge of the angle to choose the solution with the correct 
sign. If we know the quadrant where the angle is, we can easily choose the correct solution. 

Pythagorean Identity 

The Pythagorean Identity states that, for any real number 



706     7 • The Unit Circle: Sine and Cosine Functions

...
HOW TO 

Given the sine of some angle  and its quadrant location, find the cosine of 

1. Substitute the known value of  into the Pythagorean Identity. 
2. Solve for 
3. Choose the solution with the appropriate sign for the x-values in the quadrant where  is located. 

EXAMPLE 3 

Finding a Cosine from a Sine or a Sine from a Cosine 
If  and  is in the second quadrant, find 

Solution 
If we drop a vertical line from the point on the unit circle corresponding to  we create a right triangle, from which we 
can see that the Pythagorean Identity is simply one case of the Pythagorean Theorem. See Figure 8. 

Figure 8 
Substituting the known value for sine into the Pythagorean Identity, 

Because the angle is in the second quadrant, we know the x-value is a negative real number, so the cosine is also 
negative. 

 TRY IT #3 If  and  is in the fourth quadrant, find 

Finding Sines and Cosines of Special Angles 
We have already learned some properties of the special angles, such as the conversion from radians to degrees, and we 
found their sines and cosines using right triangles. We can also calculate sines and cosines of the special angles using 
the Pythagorean Identity. 

Access for free at openstax.org



7.3 • Unit Circle     707

Finding Sines and Cosines of  Angles 
First, we will look at angles of  or  as shown in Figure 9. A  triangle is an isosceles triangle, so the x- 
and y-coordinates of the corresponding point on the circle are the same. Because the x- and y-values are the same, the 
sine and cosine values will also be equal. 

Figure 9 
At  which is 45 degrees, the radius of the unit circle bisects the first quadrantal angle. This means the radius lies 
along the line  A unit circle has a radius equal to 1 so the right triangle formed below the line  has sides 
and  and radius = 1. See Figure 10. 

Figure 10 
From the Pythagorean Theorem we get 

We can then substitute 

Next we combine like terms. 

And solving for  we get 

In quadrant I, 

At  or 45 degrees, 



708     7 • The Unit Circle: Sine and Cosine Functions

If we then rationalize the denominators, we get 

Therefore, the  coordinates of a point on a circle of radius  at an angle of  are 

Finding Sines and Cosines of  and  Angles 
Next, we will find the cosine and sine at an angle of  or  First, we will draw a triangle inside a circle with one side at 
an angle of  and another at an angle of  as shown in Figure 11. If the resulting two right triangles are combined 
into one large triangle, notice that all three angles of this larger triangle will be  as shown in Figure 12. 

Figure 11 

Figure 12 
Because all the angles are equal, the sides are also equal. The vertical line has length  and since the sides are all 
equal, we can also conclude that  or  Since 

And since  in our unit circle, 

Access for free at openstax.org



7.3 • Unit Circle     709

Using the Pythagorean Identity, we can find the cosine value. 

The  coordinates for the point on a circle of radius  at an angle of  are  At  the radius of 

the unit circle, 1, serves as the hypotenuse of a 30-60-90 degree right triangle,  as shown in Figure 13. Angle  has 
measure  At point  we draw an angle  with measure of  We know the angles in a triangle sum to  so 
the measure of angle  is also  Now we have an equilateral triangle. Because each side of the equilateral triangle 

 is the same length, and we know one side is the radius of the unit circle, all sides must be of length 1. 

Figure 13 
The measure of angle  is 30°. Angle  is double angle  so its measure is 60°.  is the perpendicular 
bisector of  so it cuts  in half. This means that  is  the radius, or  Notice that  is the x-coordinate of 
point  which is at the intersection of the 60° angle and the unit circle. This gives us a triangle  with hypotenuse of 
1 and side  of length 

From the Pythagorean Theorem, we get 

Substituting  we get 

Solving for  we get 

Since  has the terminal side in quadrant I where the y-coordinate is positive, we choose  the positive value. 



710     7 • The Unit Circle: Sine and Cosine Functions

At  (60°), the  coordinates for the point on a circle of radius  at an angle of  are  so we can find 

the sine and cosine. 

We have now found the cosine and sine values for all of the most commonly encountered angles in the first quadrant of 
the unit circle. Table 1 summarizes these values. 

Angle  or  or  or  or 

Cosine 1 0 

Sine 0 1 

Table 1 

Figure 14 shows the common angles in the first quadrant of the unit circle. 

Figure 14 

Using a Calculator to Find Sine and Cosine 
To find the cosine and sine of angles other than the special angles, we turn to a computer or calculator. Be aware: Most 
calculators can be set into “degree” or “radian” mode, which tells the calculator the units for the input value. When we 
evaluate  on our calculator, it will evaluate it as the cosine of 30 degrees if the calculator is in degree mode, or the 
cosine of 30 radians if the calculator is in radian mode. 

...
HOW TO 

Given an angle in radians, use a graphing calculator to find the cosine. 

1. If the calculator has degree mode and radian mode, set it to radian mode. 
2. Press the COS key. 
3. Enter the radian value of the angle and press the close-parentheses key ")". 

Access for free at openstax.org



7.3 • Unit Circle     711

4. Press ENTER. 

EXAMPLE 4 

Using a Graphing Calculator to Find Sine and Cosine 
Evaluate  using a graphing calculator or computer. 

Solution 
Enter the following keystrokes: 

Analysis 
We can find the cosine or sine of an angle in degrees directly on a calculator with degree mode. For calculators or 
software that use only radian mode, we can find the sine of  for example, by including the conversion factor to 
radians as part of the input: 

 TRY IT #4 Evaluate 

Identifying the Domain and Range of Sine and Cosine Functions 
Now that we can find the sine and cosine of an angle, we need to discuss their domains and ranges. What are the 
domains of the sine and cosine functions? That is, what are the smallest and largest numbers that can be inputs of the 
functions? Because angles smaller than  and angles larger than  can still be graphed on the unit circle and have real 
values of  and  there is no lower or upper limit to the angles that can be inputs to the sine and cosine functions. 
The input to the sine and cosine functions is the rotation from the positive x-axis, and that may be any real number. 
What are the ranges of the sine and cosine functions? What are the least and greatest possible values for their output? 
We can see the answers by examining the unit circle, as shown in Figure 15. The bounds of the x-coordinate are 
The bounds of the y-coordinate are also  Therefore, the range of both the sine and cosine functions is 

Figure 15 

Finding Reference Angles 
We have discussed finding the sine and cosine for angles in the first quadrant, but what if our angle is in another 
quadrant? For any given angle in the first quadrant, there is an angle in the second quadrant with the same sine value. 
Because the sine value is the y-coordinate on the unit circle, the other angle with the same sine will share the same 



712     7 • The Unit Circle: Sine and Cosine Functions

y-value, but have the opposite x-value. Therefore, its cosine value will be the opposite of the first angle’s cosine value. 
Likewise, there will be an angle in the fourth quadrant with the same cosine as the original angle. The angle with the 
same cosine will share the same x-value but will have the opposite y-value. Therefore, its sine value will be the opposite 
of the original angle’s sine value. 
As shown in Figure 16, angle  has the same sine value as angle  the cosine values are opposites. Angle  has the same 
cosine value as angle  the sine values are opposites. 

Figure 16 
Recall that an angle’s reference angle is the acute angle,  formed by the terminal side of the angle  and the horizontal 
axis. A reference angle is always an angle between  and  or  and  radians. As we can see from Figure 17, for any 
angle in quadrants II, III, or IV, there is a reference angle in quadrant I. 

Figure 17 
...

HOW TO 

Given an angle between  and  find its reference angle. 

1. An angle in the first quadrant is its own reference angle. 
2. For an angle in the second or third quadrant, the reference angle is  or 
3. For an angle in the fourth quadrant, the reference angle is  or 
4. If an angle is less than  or greater than  add or subtract  as many times as needed to find an equivalent 

angle between  and 

Access for free at openstax.org



7.3 • Unit Circle     713

EXAMPLE 5 

Finding a Reference Angle 
Find the reference angle of  as shown in Figure 18. 

Figure 18 

Solution 
Because  is in the third quadrant, the reference angle is 

 TRY IT #5 Find the reference angle of 

Using Reference Angles 
Now let’s take a moment to reconsider the Ferris wheel introduced at the beginning of this section. Suppose a rider 
snaps a photograph while stopped twenty feet above ground level. The rider then rotates three-quarters of the way 
around the circle. What is the rider’s new elevation? To answer questions such as this one, we need to evaluate the sine 
or cosine functions at angles that are greater than 90 degrees or at a negative angle. Reference angles make it possible 
to evaluate trigonometric functions for angles outside the first quadrant. They can also be used to find  coordinates 
for those angles. We will use the reference angle of the angle of rotation combined with the quadrant in which the 
terminal side of the angle lies. 

Using Reference Angles to Evaluate Trigonometric Functions 
We can find the cosine and sine of any angle in any quadrant if we know the cosine or sine of its reference angle. The 
absolute values of the cosine and sine of an angle are the same as those of the reference angle. The sign depends on the 
quadrant of the original angle. The cosine will be positive or negative depending on the sign of the x-values in that 
quadrant. The sine will be positive or negative depending on the sign of the y-values in that quadrant. 

Using Reference Angles to Find Cosine and Sine 

Angles have cosines and sines with the same absolute value as their reference angles. The sign (positive or negative) 
can be determined from the quadrant of the angle. 

...
HOW TO 

Given an angle in standard position, find the reference angle, and the cosine and sine of the original angle. 



714     7 • The Unit Circle: Sine and Cosine Functions

1. Measure the angle between the terminal side of the given angle and the horizontal axis. That is the reference 
angle. 

2. Determine the values of the cosine and sine of the reference angle. 
3. Give the cosine the same sign as the x-values in the quadrant of the original angle. 
4. Give the sine the same sign as the y-values in the quadrant of the original angle. 

EXAMPLE 6 

Using Reference Angles to Find Sine and Cosine 
ⓐ  Using a reference angle, find the exact value of  and 
ⓑ  Using the reference angle, find  and 

Solution 
ⓐ   is located in the second quadrant. The angle it makes with the x-axis is  so the reference 
angle is 
This tells us that  has the same sine and cosine values as  except for the sign. 

Since  is in the second quadrant, the x-coordinate of the point on the circle is negative, so the cosine value is 
negative. The y-coordinate is positive, so the sine value is positive. 

ⓑ   is in the third quadrant. Its reference angle is  The cosine and sine of  are both  In the third 
quadrant, both  and  are negative, so: 

 TRY IT #6 ⓐ  Use the reference angle of  to find  and 
ⓑ  Use the reference angle of  to find  and 

Using Reference Angles to Find Coordinates 
Now that we have learned how to find the cosine and sine values for special angles in the first quadrant, we can use 
symmetry and reference angles to fill in cosine and sine values for the rest of the special angles on the unit circle. They 
are shown in Figure 19. Take time to learn the  coordinates of all of the major angles in the first quadrant. 

Access for free at openstax.org



7.3 • Unit Circle     715

Figure 19 Special angles and coordinates of corresponding points on the unit circle 
In addition to learning the values for special angles, we can use reference angles to find  coordinates of any point 
on the unit circle, using what we know of reference angles along with the identities 

First we find the reference angle corresponding to the given angle. Then we take the sine and cosine values of the 
reference angle, and give them the signs corresponding to the y- and x-values of the quadrant. 

...
HOW TO 

Given the angle of a point on a circle and the radius of the circle, find the  coordinates of the point. 

1. Find the reference angle by measuring the smallest angle to the x-axis. 
2. Find the cosine and sine of the reference angle. 
3. Determine the appropriate signs for  and  in the given quadrant. 

EXAMPLE 7 

Using the Unit Circle to Find Coordinates 
Find the coordinates of the point on the unit circle at an angle of 

Solution 
We know that the angle  is in the third quadrant. 

First, let’s find the reference angle by measuring the angle to the x-axis. To find the reference angle of an angle whose 
terminal side is in quadrant III, we find the difference of the angle and 

Next, we will find the cosine and sine of the reference angle. 

We must determine the appropriate signs for x and y in the given quadrant. Because our original angle is in the third 
quadrant, where both  and  are negative, both cosine and sine are negative. 



716     7 • The Unit Circle: Sine and Cosine Functions

Now we can calculate the  coordinates using the identities  and 

The coordinates of the point are  on the unit circle. 

 TRY IT #7 Find the coordinates of the point on the unit circle at an angle of 

 MEDIA 

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with sine and cosine functions. 

Trigonometric Functions Using the Unit Circle (https://openstax.org/l/trigunitcir) 
Sine and Cosine from the Unit (https://openstax.org/l/sincosuc) 
Sine and Cosine from the Unit Circle and Multiples of Pi Divided by Six (https://openstax.org/l/sincosmult) 
Sine and Cosine from the Unit Circle and Multiples of Pi Divided by Four (https://openstax.org/l/sincosmult4) 
Trigonometric Functions Using Reference Angles (https://openstax.org/l/trigrefang) 

 7.3 SECTION EXERCISES 
Verbal 

1 . Describe the unit circle.  2 . What do the x- and  3 . Discuss the difference 
y-coordinates of the points between a coterminal angle 
on the unit circle represent? and a reference angle. 

4 . Explain how the cosine of an  5 . Explain how the sine of an 
angle in the second angle in the second 
quadrant differs from the quadrant differs from the 
cosine of its reference angle sine of its reference angle in 
in the unit circle. the unit circle. 

Algebraic 

For the following exercises, use the given sign of the sine and cosine functions to find the quadrant in which the terminal 
point determined by  lies. 
6 .  and  7 .  and  8 .  and 
9 .  and 

For the following exercises, find the exact value of each trigonometric function. 
10 .  11 .  12 . 

13 .  14 .  15 . 

16 .  17 .  18 . 

19 .  20 .  21 . 

22 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



7.3 • Unit Circle     717

Numeric 

For the following exercises, state the reference angle for the given angle. 
23 .  24 .  25 . 

26 .  27 .  28 . 

29 .  30 .  31 . 

32 .  33 . 

For the following exercises, find the reference angle, the quadrant of the terminal side, and the sine and cosine of each 
angle. If the angle is not one of the angles on the unit circle, use a calculator and round to three decimal places. 
34 .  35 .  36 . 
37 .  38 .  39 . 

40 .  41 . 42 . 

43 .  44 .  45 . 

46 .  47 .  48 . 

49 . 

For the following exercises, find the requested value. 

50 . If  and  is in the  51 . If  and  is in the  52 . If  and  is in the 
fourth quadrant, find first quadrant, find second quadrant, find 

53 . If  and  is in  54 . Find the coordinates of the  55 . Find the coordinates of the 
the third quadrant, find point on a circle with point on a circle with 

radius 15 corresponding to radius 20 corresponding to 
an angle of an angle of 

56 . Find the coordinates of the  57 . Find the coordinates of the  58 . State the domain of the 
point on a circle with point on a circle with sine and cosine functions. 
radius 8 corresponding to radius 16 corresponding to 
an angle of an angle of 

59 . State the range of the sine 
and cosine functions. 

Graphical 

For the following exercises, use the given point on the unit circle to find the value of the sine and cosine of 
60 .  61 .  62 . 



718     7 • The Unit Circle: Sine and Cosine Functions

63 .  64 .  65 . 

66 .  67 .  68 . 

69 .  70 .  71 . 

72 .  73 .  74 . 

75 .  76 .  77 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



7.4 • The Other Trigonometric Functions     719

78 .  79 . 

Technology 

For the following exercises, use a graphing calculator to evaluate. 

80 .  81 .  82 . 

83 .  84 .  85 . 

86 .  87 .  88 . 
89 . 

Extensions 

For the following exercises, evaluate. 

90 .  91 .  92 . 

93 .  94 .  95 . 

96 .  97 .  98 . 

99 . 

Real-World Applications 

For the following exercises, use this scenario: A child enters a carousel that takes one minute to revolve once around. The 
child enters at the point  that is, on the due north position. Assume the carousel revolves counter clockwise. 
100. What are the coordinates  101 . What are the coordinates  102 . What are the coordinates 

of the child after 45 of the child after 90 of the child after 125 
seconds? seconds? seconds? 

103. When will the child have  104 . When will the child have 
coordinates coordinates 

 if the ride if the ride lasts 6 minutes? 
lasts 6 minutes? (There 
are multiple answers.) 

7.4 The Other Trigonometric Functions 
Learning Objectives 
In this section you will: 

Find exact values of the trigonometric functions secant, cosecant, tangent, and cotangent of  and 
Use reference angles to evaluate the trigonometric functions secant, tangent, and cotangent. 
Use properties of even and odd trigonometric functions. 
Recognize and use fundamental identities. 
Evaluate trigonometric functions with a calculator. 

A wheelchair ramp that meets the standards of the Americans with Disabilities Act must make an angle with the ground 



720     7 • The Unit Circle: Sine and Cosine Functions

whose tangent is  or less, regardless of its length. A tangent represents a ratio, so this means that for every 1 inch of 
rise, the ramp must have 12 inches of run. Trigonometric functions allow us to specify the shapes and proportions of 
objects independent of exact dimensions. We have already defined the sine and cosine functions of an angle. Though 
sine and cosine are the trigonometric functions most often used, there are four others. Together they make up the set of 
six trigonometric functions. In this section, we will investigate the remaining functions. 

Finding Exact Values of the Trigonometric Functions Secant, Cosecant, Tangent, 
and Cotangent 
We can also define the remaining functions in terms of the unit circle with a point  corresponding to an angle of 
as shown in Figure 1. As with the sine and cosine, we can use the  coordinates to find the other functions. 

Figure 1 
The first function we will define is the tangent. The tangent of an angle is the ratio of the y-value to the x-value of the 
corresponding point on the unit circle. In Figure 1, the tangent of angle  is equal to  Because the y-value is 
equal to the sine of  and the x-value is equal to the cosine of  the tangent of angle  can also be defined as 

 The tangent function is abbreviated as  The remaining three functions can all be expressed as 
reciprocals of functions we have already defined. 

• The secant function is the reciprocal of the cosine function. In Figure 1, the secant of angle  is equal to 
 The secant function is abbreviated as 

• The cotangent function is the reciprocal of the tangent function. In Figure 1, the cotangent of angle  is equal to 
 The cotangent function is abbreviated as 

• The cosecant function is the reciprocal of the sine function. In Figure 1, the cosecant of angle  is equal to 
 The cosecant function is abbreviated as 

Tangent, Secant, Cosecant, and Cotangent Functions 

If  is a real number and  is a point where the terminal side of an angle of  radians intercepts the unit circle, then 

EXAMPLE 1 

Finding Trigonometric Functions from a Point on the Unit Circle 
The point  is on the unit circle, as shown in Figure 2. Find  and 

Access for free at openstax.org



7.4 • The Other Trigonometric Functions     721

Figure 2 

Solution 
Because we know the  coordinates of the point on the unit circle indicated by angle  we can use those coordinates 
to find the six functions: 

 TRY IT #1 The point  is on the unit circle, as shown in Figure 3. Find 

 and 

Figure 3 

EXAMPLE 2 

Finding the Trigonometric Functions of an Angle 
Find  and  when 



722     7 • The Unit Circle: Sine and Cosine Functions

Solution 
We have previously used the properties of equilateral triangles to demonstrate that  and  We 
can use these values and the definitions of tangent, secant, cosecant, and cotangent as functions of sine and cosine to 
find the remaining function values. 

 TRY IT #2 Find  and  when 

Because we know the sine and cosine values for the common first-quadrant angles, we can find the other function 
values for those angles as well by setting  equal to the cosine and  equal to the sine and then using the definitions of 
tangent, secant, cosecant, and cotangent. The results are shown in Table 1. 

Angle 

Cosine 1 0 

Sine 0 1 

Tangent 0 1 Undefined 

Secant 1 2 Undefined 

Cosecant Undefined 2 1 

Cotangent Undefined 1 0 

Table 1 

Using Reference Angles to Evaluate Tangent, Secant, Cosecant, and Cotangent 
We can evaluate trigonometric functions of angles outside the first quadrant using reference angles as we have already 
done with the sine and cosine functions. The procedure is the same: Find the reference angle formed by the terminal 
side of the given angle with the horizontal axis. The trigonometric function values for the original angle will be the same 

Access for free at openstax.org



7.4 • The Other Trigonometric Functions     723

as those for the reference angle, except for the positive or negative sign, which is determined by x- and y-values in the 
original quadrant. Figure 4 shows which functions are positive in which quadrant. 
To help remember which of the six trigonometric functions are positive in each quadrant, we can use the mnemonic 
phrase “A Smart Trig Class.” Each of the four words in the phrase corresponds to one of the four quadrants, starting with 
quadrant I and rotating counterclockwise. In quadrant I, which is “A,” all of the six trigonometric functions are positive. 
In quadrant II, “Smart,” only sine and its reciprocal function, cosecant, are positive. In quadrant III, “Trig,” only tangent 
and its reciprocal function, cotangent, are positive. Finally, in quadrant IV, “Class,” only cosine and its reciprocal function, 
secant, are positive. 

Figure 4 The trigonometric functions are each listed in the quadrants in which they are positive. 
...

HOW TO 

Given an angle not in the first quadrant, use reference angles to find all six trigonometric functions. 

1. Measure the angle formed by the terminal side of the given angle and the horizontal axis. This is the reference 
angle. 

2. Evaluate the function at the reference angle. 
3. Observe the quadrant where the terminal side of the original angle is located. Based on the quadrant, determine 

whether the output is positive or negative. 

EXAMPLE 3 

Using Reference Angles to Find Trigonometric Functions 
Use reference angles to find all six trigonometric functions of 

Solution 
The angle between this angle’s terminal side and the x-axis is  so that is the reference angle. Since  is in the third 
quadrant, where both  and  are negative, cosine, sine, secant, and cosecant will be negative, while tangent and 
cotangent will be positive. 

 TRY IT #3 Use reference angles to find all six trigonometric functions of 



724     7 • The Unit Circle: Sine and Cosine Functions

Using Even and Odd Trigonometric Functions 
To be able to use our six trigonometric functions freely with both positive and negative angle inputs, we should examine 
how each function treats a negative input. As it turns out, there is an important difference among the functions in this 
regard. 

Consider the function  shown in Figure 5. The graph of the function is symmetrical about the y-axis. All along 
the curve, any two points with opposite x-values have the same function value. This matches the result of calculation: 

 and so on. So  is an even function, a function such that two inputs that are 
opposites have the same output. That means 

Figure 5 The function  is an even function. 

Now consider the function  shown in Figure 6. The graph is not symmetrical about the y-axis. All along the 
graph, any two points with opposite x-values also have opposite y-values. So  is an odd function, one such that 
two inputs that are opposites have outputs that are also opposites. That means 

Figure 6 The function  is an odd function. 
We can test whether a trigonometric function is even or odd by drawing a unit circle with a positive and a negative angle, 
as in Figure 7. The sine of the positive angle is  The sine of the negative angle is  The sine function, then, is an odd 
function. We can test each of the six trigonometric functions in this fashion. The results are shown in Table 2. 

Figure 7 

Access for free at openstax.org



7.4 • The Other Trigonometric Functions     725

Table 2 

Even and Odd Trigonometric Functions 

An even function is one in which 

An odd function is one in which 

Cosine and secant are even: 

Sine, tangent, cosecant, and cotangent are odd: 

EXAMPLE 4 

Using Even and Odd Properties of Trigonometric Functions 
If the secant of angle  is 2, what is the secant of 

Solution 
Secant is an even function. The secant of an angle is the same as the secant of its opposite. So if the secant of angle  is 
2, the secant of  is also 2. 

 TRY IT #4 If the cotangent of angle  is  what is the cotangent of 

Recognizing and Using Fundamental Identities 
We have explored a number of properties of trigonometric functions. Now, we can take the relationships a step further, 
and derive some fundamental identities. Identities are statements that are true for all values of the input on which they 
are defined. Usually, identities can be derived from definitions and relationships we already know. For example, the 
Pythagorean Identity we learned earlier was derived from the Pythagorean Theorem and the definitions of sine and 
cosine. 

Fundamental Identities 

We can derive some useful identities from the six trigonometric functions. The other four trigonometric functions 
can be related back to the sine and cosine functions using these basic relationships: 



726     7 • The Unit Circle: Sine and Cosine Functions

EXAMPLE 5 

Using Identities to Evaluate Trigonometric Functions 

ⓐ  Given  evaluate 

ⓑ  Given  evaluate 
Solution 

Because we know the sine and cosine values for these angles, we can use identities to evaluate the other functions. 

ⓑ 
ⓐ 

 

 TRY IT #5 Evaluate 

EXAMPLE 6 

Using Identities to Simplify Trigonometric Expressions 
Simplify 

Solution 
We can simplify this by rewriting both functions in terms of sine and cosine. 

By showing that  can be simplified to  we have, in fact, established a new identity. 

 TRY IT #6 Simplify 

Alternate Forms of the Pythagorean Identity 
We can use these fundamental identities to derive alternate forms of the Pythagorean Identity,  One 
form is obtained by dividing both sides by 

Access for free at openstax.org



7.4 • The Other Trigonometric Functions     727

The other form is obtained by dividing both sides by 

Alternate Forms of the Pythagorean Identity 

EXAMPLE 7 

Using Identities to Relate Trigonometric Functions 
If  and  is in quadrant IV, as shown in Figure 8, find the values of the other five trigonometric functions. 

Figure 8 

Solution 
We can find the sine using the Pythagorean Identity,  and the remaining functions by relating them to 
sine and cosine. 

The sign of the sine depends on the y-values in the quadrant where the angle is located. Since the angle is in quadrant 
IV, where the y-values are negative, its sine is negative, 



728     7 • The Unit Circle: Sine and Cosine Functions

The remaining functions can be calculated using identities relating them to sine and cosine. 

 TRY IT #7 If  and  find the values of the other five functions. 

As we discussed at the beginning of the chapter, a function that repeats its values in regular intervals is known as a 
periodic function. The trigonometric functions are periodic. For the four trigonometric functions, sine, cosine, cosecant 
and secant, a revolution of one circle, or  will result in the same outputs for these functions. And for tangent and 
cotangent, only a half a revolution will result in the same outputs. 
Other functions can also be periodic. For example, the lengths of months repeat every four years. If  represents the 
length time, measured in years, and  represents the number of days in February, then  This pattern 
repeats over and over through time. In other words, every four years (except for multiples of 100), February typically has 
the same number of days as it did 4 years earlier. The positive number 4 is the smallest positive number that satisfies 
this condition and is called the period. A period is the shortest interval over which a function completes one full cycle—in 
this example, the period is 4 and represents the time it takes for us to be certain February has the same number of days. 

Period of a Function 

The period  of a repeating function  is the number representing the interval such that  for any 
value of 

The period of the cosine, sine, secant, and cosecant functions is 

The period of the tangent and cotangent functions is 

EXAMPLE 8 

Finding the Values of Trigonometric Functions 
Find the values of the six trigonometric functions of angle  based on Figure 9. 

Access for free at openstax.org



7.4 • The Other Trigonometric Functions     729

Figure 9 

Solution 

 TRY IT #8 Find the values of the six trigonometric functions of angle  based on Figure 10. 

Figure 10 



730     7 • The Unit Circle: Sine and Cosine Functions

EXAMPLE 9 

Finding the Value of Trigonometric Functions 
If 

Solution 

 TRY IT #9 

Evaluating Trigonometric Functions with a Calculator 
We have learned how to evaluate the six trigonometric functions for the common first-quadrant angles and to use them 
as reference angles for angles in other quadrants. To evaluate trigonometric functions of other angles, we use a 
scientific or graphing calculator or computer software. If the calculator has a degree mode and a radian mode, confirm 
the correct mode is chosen before making a calculation. 
Evaluating a tangent function with a scientific calculator as opposed to a graphing calculator or computer algebra 
system is like evaluating a sine or cosine: Enter the value and press the TAN key. For the reciprocal functions, there may 
not be any dedicated keys that say CSC, SEC, or COT. In that case, the function must be evaluated as the reciprocal of a 
sine, cosine, or tangent. 
If we need to work with degrees and our calculator or software does not have a degree mode, we can enter the degrees 
multiplied by the conversion factor  to convert the degrees to radians. To find the secant of  we could press 

...
HOW TO 

Given an angle measure in radians, use a scientific calculator to find the cosecant. 

1. If the calculator has degree mode and radian mode, set it to radian mode. 
2. Enter: 
3. Enter the value of the angle inside parentheses. 
4. Press the SIN key. 
5. Press the = key. 

...
HOW TO 

Given an angle measure in radians, use a graphing utility/calculator to find the cosecant. 

Access for free at openstax.org



7.4 • The Other Trigonometric Functions     731

• If the graphing utility has degree mode and radian mode, set it to radian mode. 
• Enter: 
• Press the SIN key. 
• Enter the value of the angle inside parentheses. 
• Press the ENTER key. 

EXAMPLE 10 

Evaluating the Cosecant Using Technology 
Evaluate the cosecant of 

Solution 
For a scientific calculator, enter information as follows: 

 TRY IT #10 Evaluate the cotangent of 

 MEDIA 

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with other trigonometric functions. 

Determing Trig Function Values (https://openstax.org/l/trigfuncval) 
More Examples of Determining Trig Functions (https://openstax.org/l/moretrigfun) 
Pythagorean Identities (https://openstax.org/l/pythagiden) 
Trig Functions on a Calculator (https://openstax.org/l/trigcalc) 

 7.4 SECTION EXERCISES 
Verbal 

1 . On an interval of  2 . What would you estimate  3 . For any angle in quadrant II, 
can the sine and cosine the cosine of  degrees to if you knew the sine of the 
values of a radian measure be? Explain your reasoning. angle, how could you 
ever be equal? If so, where? determine the cosine of the 

angle? 
4 . Describe the secant  5 . Tangent and cotangent have 

function. a period of  What does 
this tell us about the output 
of these functions? 

Algebraic 

For the following exercises, find the exact value of each expression. 
6 .  7 .  8 . 

9 .  10 .  11 . 

12 .  13 .  14 . 

15 .  16 .  17 . 



732     7 • The Unit Circle: Sine and Cosine Functions

For the following exercises, use reference angles to evaluate the expression. 

18 .  19 .  20 . 

21 .  22 .  23 . 

24 .  25 .  26 . 

27 .  28 .  29 . 

30 . 31 .  32 . 
33 .  34 .  35 . 

36 .  37 .  38 . If  and  is in 
quadrant II, find 

and 

39 . If  and  is in  40 . If , and , find  41 . If  and 
quadrant III, find  find 

 and 
and 

42 . If  and  43 . If  what is the  44 . If  what is the 
 find 

and 
45 . If  what is the  46 . If  what is the  47 . If  what is the 

48 . If  what is the 

Graphical 

For the following exercises, use the angle in the unit circle to find the value of the each of the six trigonometric functions. 
49 . 50 . 51 . 

Technology 

For the following exercises, use a graphing calculator to evaluate to three decimal places. 

52 .  53 .  54 . 

55 .  56 .  57 . 

58 .  59 .  60 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



7.4 • The Other Trigonometric Functions     733

61 . 

Extensions 

For the following exercises, use identities to evaluate the expression. 
62 . If  and  63 . If  and  64 . If  and 

 find  find  find 
65 . If  and  66 . Determine whether the function 

 find  is even, odd, or neither. 
67 . Determine whether the function  68 . Determine whether the function 

 is even, odd, or  is even, odd, or neither. 
neither. 

69 . Determine whether the function 
 is even, odd, or neither. 

For the following exercises, use identities to simplify the expression. 
70 .  71 . 

Real-World Applications 

72 . The amount of sunlight in  73 . The amount of sunlight in  74 . The equation 
a certain city can be a certain city can be 
modeled by the function modeled by the function models the blood pressure, 

 where  where  where  represents time 
 represents the hours of  represents the hours of in seconds. (a) Find the 

sunlight, and  is the day sunlight, and  is the day blood pressure after 15 
of the year. Use the of the year. Use the seconds. (b) What are the 
equation to find how many equation to find how many maximum and minimum 
hours of sunlight there are hours of sunlight there are blood pressures? 
on February 11, the 42nd on September 24, the 
day of the year. State the 267th day of the year. State 
period of the function. the period of the function. 

75 . The height of a piston,  in  76 . The height of a piston,  in 
inches, can be modeled by inches, can be modeled by 
the equation the equation 

 where  where 
represents the crank angle. represents the crank angle. 
Find the height of the Find the height of the 
piston when the crank piston when the crank 
angle is angle is 



734     7 • Chapter Review

Chapter Review 
Key Terms 
adjacent side  in a right triangle, the side between a given angle and the right angle 
angle  the union of two rays having a common endpoint 
angle of depression the angle between the horizontal and the line from the object to the observer’s eye, assuming the 

object is positioned lower than the observer 
angle of elevation the angle between the horizontal and the line from the object to the observer’s eye, assuming the 

object is positioned higher than the observer 
angular speed  the angle through which a rotating object travels in a unit of time 
arc length  the length of the curve formed by an arc 
area of a sector  area of a portion of a circle bordered by two radii and the intercepted arc; the fraction  multiplied 

by the area of the entire circle 
cosecant the reciprocal of the sine function: on the unit circle, 
cosine function  the x-value of the point on a unit circle corresponding to a given angle 
cotangent the reciprocal of the tangent function: on the unit circle, 
coterminal angles  description of positive and negative angles in standard position sharing the same terminal side 
degree  a unit of measure describing the size of an angle as one-360th of a full revolution of a circle 
hypotenuse  the side of a right triangle opposite the right angle 
identities  statements that are true for all values of the input on which they are defined 
initial side  the side of an angle from which rotation begins 
linear speed  the distance along a straight path a rotating object travels in a unit of time; determined by the arc length 
measure of an angle  the amount of rotation from the initial side to the terminal side 
negative angle  description of an angle measured clockwise from the positive x-axis 
opposite side  in a right triangle, the side most distant from a given angle 
period  the smallest interval  of a repeating function  such that 
positive angle  description of an angle measured counterclockwise from the positive x-axis 
Pythagorean Identity  a corollary of the Pythagorean Theorem stating that the square of the cosine of a given angle 

plus the square of the sine of that angle equals 1 
quadrantal angle an angle whose terminal side lies on an axis 
radian  the measure of a central angle of a circle that intercepts an arc equal in length to the radius of that circle 
radian measure  the ratio of the arc length formed by an angle divided by the radius of the circle 
ray  one point on a line and all points extending in one direction from that point; one side of an angle 
reference angle  the measure of the acute angle formed by the terminal side of the angle and the horizontal axis 
secant the reciprocal of the cosine function: on the unit circle, 
sine function  the y-value of the point on a unit circle corresponding to a given angle 
standard position  the position of an angle having the vertex at the origin and the initial side along the positive x-axis 
tangent the quotient of the sine and cosine: on the unit circle, 
terminal side  the side of an angle at which rotation ends 
unit circle a circle with a center at  and radius 1 
vertex  the common endpoint of two rays that form an angle 

Key Equations 

arc length 

area of a sector 

angular speed 

linear speed 

linear speed related to angular speed 

Access for free at openstax.org



7 • Chapter Review     735

Trigonometric Functions 

Reciprocal Trigonometric Functions 

Cofunction Identities 

Cosine 

Sine 

Pythagorean Identity 

Tangent function 

Secant function 

Cosecant function 

Cotangent function 

Key Concepts 
7.1 Angles 

• An angle is formed from the union of two rays, by keeping the initial side fixed and rotating the terminal side. The 
amount of rotation determines the measure of the angle. 

• An angle is in standard position if its vertex is at the origin and its initial side lies along the positive x-axis. A positive 
angle is measured counterclockwise from the initial side and a negative angle is measured clockwise. 

• To draw an angle in standard position, draw the initial side along the positive x-axis and then place the terminal side 
according to the fraction of a full rotation the angle represents. See Example 1. 

• In addition to degrees, the measure of an angle can be described in radians. See Example 2. 
• To convert between degrees and radians, use the proportion  See Example 3 and Example 4. 
• Two angles that have the same terminal side are called coterminal angles. 
• We can find coterminal angles by adding or subtracting  or  See Example 5 and Example 6. 



736     7 • Chapter Review

• Coterminal angles can be found using radians just as they are for degrees. See Example 7. 
• The length of a circular arc is a fraction of the circumference of the entire circle. See Example 8. 
• The area of sector is a fraction of the area of the entire circle. See Example 9. 
• An object moving in a circular path has both linear and angular speed. 
• The angular speed of an object traveling in a circular path is the measure of the angle through which it turns in a 

unit of time. See Example 10. 
• The linear speed of an object traveling along a circular path is the distance it travels in a unit of time. See Example 

11. 

7.2 Right Triangle Trigonometry 
• We can define trigonometric functions as ratios of the side lengths of a right triangle. See Example 1. 
• The same side lengths can be used to evaluate the trigonometric functions of either acute angle in a right triangle. 

See Example 2. 
• We can evaluate the trigonometric functions of special angles, knowing the side lengths of the triangles in which 

they occur. See Example 3. 
• Any two complementary angles could be the two acute angles of a right triangle. 
• If two angles are complementary, the cofunction identities state that the sine of one equals the cosine of the other 

and vice versa. See Example 4. 
• We can use trigonometric functions of an angle to find unknown side lengths. 
• Select the trigonometric function representing the ratio of the unknown side to the known side. See Example 5. 
• Right-triangle trigonometry facilitates the measurement of inaccessible heights and distances. 
• The unknown height or distance can be found by creating a right triangle in which the unknown height or distance 

is one of the sides, and another side and angle are known. See Example 6. 

7.3 Unit Circle 
• Finding the function values for the sine and cosine begins with drawing a unit circle, which is centered at the origin 

and has a radius of 1 unit. 
• Using the unit circle, the sine of an angle  equals the y-value of the endpoint on the unit circle of an arc of length 

whereas the cosine of an angle  equals the x-value of the endpoint. See Example 1. 
• The sine and cosine values are most directly determined when the corresponding point on the unit circle falls on an 

axis. See Example 2. 
• When the sine or cosine is known, we can use the Pythagorean Identity to find the other. The Pythagorean Identity is 

also useful for determining the sines and cosines of special angles. See Example 3. 
• Calculators and graphing software are helpful for finding sines and cosines if the proper procedure for entering 

information is known. See Example 4. 
• The domain of the sine and cosine functions is all real numbers. 
• The range of both the sine and cosine functions is 
• The sine and cosine of an angle have the same absolute value as the sine and cosine of its reference angle. 
• The signs of the sine and cosine are determined from the x- and y-values in the quadrant of the original angle. 
• An angle’s reference angle is the size angle,  formed by the terminal side of the angle  and the horizontal axis. See 

Example 5. 
• Reference angles can be used to find the sine and cosine of the original angle. See Example 6. 
• Reference angles can also be used to find the coordinates of a point on a circle. See Example 7. 

7.4 The Other Trigonometric Functions 
• The tangent of an angle is the ratio of the y-value to the x-value of the corresponding point on the unit circle. 
• The secant, cotangent, and cosecant are all reciprocals of other functions. The secant is the reciprocal of the cosine 

function, the cotangent is the reciprocal of the tangent function, and the cosecant is the reciprocal of the sine 
function. 

• The six trigonometric functions can be found from a point on the unit circle. See Example 1. 
• Trigonometric functions can also be found from an angle. See Example 2. 
• Trigonometric functions of angles outside the first quadrant can be determined using reference angles. See 

Example 3. 
• A function is said to be even if  and odd if  for all x in the domain of f. 
• Cosine and secant are even; sine, tangent, cosecant, and cotangent are odd. 
• Even and odd properties can be used to evaluate trigonometric functions. See Example 4. 
• The Pythagorean Identity makes it possible to find a cosine from a sine or a sine from a cosine. 
• Identities can be used to evaluate trigonometric functions. See Example 5 and Example 6. 

Access for free at openstax.org



7 • Exercises     737

• Fundamental identities such as the Pythagorean Identity can be manipulated algebraically to produce new 
identities. See Example 7. 

• The trigonometric functions repeat at regular intervals. 
• The period  of a repeating function  is the smallest interval such that  for any value of 
• The values of trigonometric functions can be found by mathematical analysis. See Example 8 and Example 9. 
• To evaluate trigonometric functions of other angles, we can use a calculator or computer software. See Example 10. 

Exercises 
Review Exercises 
Angles 
For the following exercises, convert the angle measures to degrees. 

1 .  2 . 

For the following exercises, convert the angle measures to radians. 
3 .  4 .  5 . Find the length of an arc in a 

circle of radius 7 meters 
subtended by the central 
angle of 

6 . Find the area of the sector 
of a circle with diameter 32 
feet and an angle of 
radians. 

For the following exercises, find the angle between  and  that is coterminal with the given angle. 
7 .  8 . 

For the following exercises, find the angle between 0 and  in radians that is coterminal with the given angle. 

9 .  10 . 

For the following exercises, draw the angle provided in standard position on the Cartesian plane. 

11 . 12 .  13 . 

14 .  15 . Find the linear speed of a  16 . A car wheel with a 
point on the equator of the diameter of 18 inches spins 
earth if the earth has a at the rate of 10 
radius of 3,960 miles and revolutions per second. 
the earth rotates on its axis What is the car's speed in 
every 24 hours. Express miles per hour? Round to 
answer in miles per hour. the nearest hundredth. 
Round to the nearest 
hundredth. 

Right Triangle Trigonometry 

For the following exercises, use side lengths to evaluate. 
17 .  18 .  19 . 

20 .  21 . 

For the following exercises, use the given information to find the lengths of the other two sides of the right triangle. 

22 .  23 . 



738     7 • Exercises

For the following exercises, use Figure 1 to evaluate each trigonometric function. 

Figure 1 
24 .  25 . 

For the following exercises, solve for the unknown sides of the given triangle. 
26 . 27 . 28 . A 15-ft ladder leans against 

a building so that the angle 
between the ground and 
the ladder is  How high 
does the ladder reach up 
the side of the building? 
Find the answer to four 
decimal places. 

29 . The angle of elevation to 
the top of a building in 
Baltimore is found to be 4 
degrees from the ground 
at a distance of 1 mile from 
the base of the building. 
Using this information, find 
the height of the building. 
Find the answer to four 
decimal places. 

Unit Circle 
30 . Find the exact value of  31 . Find the exact value of  32 . Find the exact value of 

33 . State the reference angle  34 . State the reference angle  35 . Compute cosine of 
for for 

36 . Compute sine of  37 . State the domain of the  38 . State the range of the sine 
sine and cosine functions. and cosine functions. 

The Other Trigonometric Functions 

For the following exercises, find the exact value of the given expression. 
39 .  40 .  41 . 

42 . 

For the following exercises, use reference angles to evaluate the given expression. 

43 .  44 .  45 . If  what is 
the 

Access for free at openstax.org



7 • Exercises     739

46 . If  what is the  47 . If  find  48 . If  find 
 There are two 

possible solutions. 
49 . Which trigonometric  50 . Which trigonometric 

functions are even? functions are odd? 

Practice Test 
1 . Convert  radians to  2 . Convert  to radians.  3 . Find the length of a circular 

degrees. arc with a radius 12 
centimeters subtended by 
the central angle of 

4 . Find the area of the sector  5 . Find the angle between  6 . Find the angle between 0 
with radius of 8 feet and an and  that is coterminal and  in radians that is 
angle of  radians. with coterminal with 

7 . Draw the angle  in  8 . Draw the angle  in  9 . A carnival has a Ferris wheel 
standard position on the standard position on the with a diameter of 80 feet. 
Cartesian plane. Cartesian plane. The time for the Ferris 

wheel to make one 
revolution is 75 seconds. 
What is the linear speed in 
feet per second of a point 
on the Ferris wheel? What is 
the angular speed in radians 
per second? 

10 . Find the missing sides of  11 . Find the missing sides of 12 . The angle of elevation to 
the triangle the triangle. the top of a building in 

Chicago is found to be 9 
degrees from the ground 
at a distance of 2000 feet 
from the base of the 
building. Using this 
information, find the 
height of the building. 

13 . Find the exact value of  14 . Compute sine of  15 . State the domain of the 
sine and cosine functions. 

16 . State the range of the sine  17 . Find the exact value of  18 . Find the exact value of 
and cosine functions. 

19 . Use reference angles to  20 . Use reference angles to  21 . If  what is the 
evaluate evaluate 

22 . If  find  23 . Find the missing angle: 



740     7 • Exercises

Access for free at openstax.org



8 • Introduction to Periodic Functions          741

8 PERIODIC FUNCTIONS 

Dawn colors the sky over the Olare Motorgi Conservancy bordering tha Masai Mara National Reserve in Kenya. (Credit: 
Modification of "KenyaLive_Day_#02" by Make it Kenya/flickr) 

Chapter Outline 
8.1 Graphs of the Sine and Cosine Functions 
8.2 Graphs of the Other Trigonometric Functions 
8.3 Inverse Trigonometric Functions 

Introduction to Periodic Functions 
The sun has played a core role in many religions. The ancient Egyptian culture portrayed the sun god, Ra (sometimes 
written as Re), as undertaking a two-part daily journey, with one portion in the sky (day) and the other through the 
underworld (night). Surya, the Hindu sun god, traces a similar path through the sky on a chariot pulled by seven horses. 
While their origins and associated narratives are quite different, both Ra and Surya are primary deities and seen as 
creators and preservers of life. In many Native American cultures, the sun is core to spiritual and religious practice, but is 
not always a deity. The Sun Dance, practiced differently by many Native American tribes, was a ceremony that generally 
paid homage to the sun and, in many cases, tested or expressed the strength of the tribe's people. 
As one of the most most prominent natural phenomena and with its close association to giving life, the sun was an 
obvious subject for reverence. And its regularity, even in ancient times, made it the primary determinant of time. Each 
day, the sun rises in an easterly direction, approaches some maximum height relative to the celestial equator, and sets in 
a westerly direction. The celestial equator is an imaginary line that divides the visible universe into two halves in much 
the same way Earth’s equator is an imaginary line that divides the planet into two halves. The exact path the sun appears 
to follow depends on the exact location on Earth, but each location observes a predictable pattern over time. 
The pattern of the sun’s motion throughout the course of a year is a periodic function. Creating a visual representation 
of a periodic function in the form of a graph can help us analyze the properties of the function. In this chapter, we will 
investigate graphs of sine, cosine, and other trigonometric functions. 

8.1 Graphs of the Sine and Cosine Functions 
Learning Objectives 
In this section, you will: 

Graph variations of     and   . 
Use phase shifts of sine and cosine curves. 



742     8 • Periodic Functions

Figure 1 Light can be separated into colors because of its wavelike properties. (credit: "wonderferret"/ Flickr) 
White light, such as the light from the sun, is not actually white at all. Instead, it is a composition of all the colors of the 
rainbow in the form of waves. The individual colors can be seen only when white light passes through an optical prism 
that separates the waves according to their wavelengths to form a rainbow. 
Light waves can be represented graphically by the sine function. In the chapter on Trigonometric Functions 
(http://openstax.org/books/precalculus-2e/pages/5-introduction-to-trigonometric-functions), we examined trigonometric 
functions such as the sine function. In this section, we will interpret and create graphs of sine and cosine functions. 

Graphing Sine and Cosine Functions 
Recall that the sine and cosine functions relate real number values to the x- and y-coordinates of a point on the unit 
circle. So what do they look like on a graph on a coordinate plane? Let’s start with the sine function. We can create a table 
of values and use them to sketch a graph. Table 1 lists some of the values for the sine function on a unit circle. 

Table 1 

Plotting the points from the table and continuing along the x-axis gives the shape of the sine function. See Figure 2. 

Figure 2 The sine function 
Notice how the sine values are positive between 0 and  which correspond to the values of the sine function in 
quadrants I and II on the unit circle, and the sine values are negative between  and  which correspond to the values 
of the sine function in quadrants III and IV on the unit circle. See Figure 3. 

Access for free at openstax.org



8.1 • Graphs of the Sine and Cosine Functions     743

Figure 3 Plotting values of the sine function 
Now let’s take a similar look at the cosine function. Again, we can create a table of values and use them to sketch a 
graph. Table 2 lists some of the values for the cosine function on a unit circle. 

Table 2 

As with the sine function, we can plots points to create a graph of the cosine function as in Figure 4. 

Figure 4 The cosine function 
Because we can evaluate the sine and cosine of any real number, both of these functions are defined for all real 
numbers. By thinking of the sine and cosine values as coordinates of points on a unit circle, it becomes clear that the 
range of both functions must be the interval 
In both graphs, the shape of the graph repeats after  which means the functions are periodic with a period of  A 
periodic function is a function for which a specific horizontal shift, P, results in a function equal to the original function: 

 for all values of  in the domain of  When this occurs, we call the smallest such horizontal shift with 
 the period of the function. Figure 5 shows several periods of the sine and cosine functions. 



744     8 • Periodic Functions

Figure 5 
Looking again at the sine and cosine functions on a domain centered at the y-axis helps reveal symmetries. As we can 
see in Figure 6, the sine function is symmetric about the origin. Recall from The Other Trigonometric Functions that we 
determined from the unit circle that the sine function is an odd function because  Now we can clearly 
see this property from the graph. 

Figure 6 Odd symmetry of the sine function 
Figure 7 shows that the cosine function is symmetric about the y-axis. Again, we determined that the cosine function is 
an even function. Now we can see from the graph that 

Figure 7 Even symmetry of the cosine function 

Characteristics of Sine and Cosine Functions 

The sine and cosine functions have several distinct characteristics: 

• They are periodic functions with a period of 
• The domain of each function is ∞ ∞  and the range is 
• The graph of  is symmetric about the origin, because it is an odd function. 
• The graph of  is symmetric about the -axis, because it is an even function. 

Access for free at openstax.org



8.1 • Graphs of the Sine and Cosine Functions     745

Investigating Sinusoidal Functions 
As we can see, sine and cosine functions have a regular period and range. If we watch ocean waves or ripples on a pond, 
we will see that they resemble the sine or cosine functions. However, they are not necessarily identical. Some are taller or 
longer than others. A function that has the same general shape as a sine or cosine function is known as a sinusoidal 
function. The general forms of sinusoidal functions are 

Determining the Period of Sinusoidal Functions 
Looking at the forms of sinusoidal functions, we can see that they are transformations of the sine and cosine functions. 
We can use what we know about transformations to determine the period. 

In the general formula,  is related to the period by  If  then the period is less than  and the function 
undergoes a horizontal compression, whereas if  then the period is greater than  and the function undergoes 
a horizontal stretch. For example,   so the period is  which we knew. If  then 

 so the period is  and the graph is compressed. If  then  so the period is  and the graph 
is stretched. Notice in Figure 8 how the period is indirectly related to 

Figure 8 

Period of Sinusoidal Functions 

If we let  and  in the general form equations of the sine and cosine functions, we obtain the forms 

The period is 

EXAMPLE 1 

Identifying the Period of a Sine or Cosine Function 
Determine the period of the function 

Solution 
Let’s begin by comparing the equation to the general form 
In the given equation,  so the period will be 



746     8 • Periodic Functions

 TRY IT #1 Determine the period of the function 

Determining Amplitude 
Returning to the general formula for a sinusoidal function, we have analyzed how the variable  relates to the period. 
Now let’s turn to the variable  so we can analyze how it is related to the amplitude, or greatest distance from rest. 
represents the vertical stretch factor, and its absolute value  is the amplitude. The local maxima will be a distance 
above the horizontal midline of the graph, which is the line  because  in this case, the midline is the x-axis. 
The local minima will be the same distance below the midline. If  the function is stretched. For example, the 
amplitude of  is twice the amplitude of  If  the function is compressed. Figure 9 
compares several sine functions with different amplitudes. 

Figure 9 

Amplitude of Sinusoidal Functions 

If we let  and  in the general form equations of the sine and cosine functions, we obtain the forms 

The amplitude is  which is the vertical height from the midline  In addition, notice in the example that 

EXAMPLE 2 

Identifying the Amplitude of a Sine or Cosine Function 
What is the amplitude of the sinusoidal function  Is the function stretched or compressed vertically? 

Solution 
Let’s begin by comparing the function to the simplified form 
In the given function,  so the amplitude is  The function is stretched. 

Access for free at openstax.org



8.1 • Graphs of the Sine and Cosine Functions     747

Analysis 
The negative value of  results in a reflection across the x-axis of the sine function, as shown in Figure 10. 

Figure 10 

 TRY IT #2 What is the amplitude of the sinusoidal function  Is the function stretched or 
compressed vertically? 

Analyzing Graphs of Variations of y = sin x and y = cos x 
Now that we understand how  and  relate to the general form equation for the sine and cosine functions, we will 
explore the variables  and  Recall the general form: 

The value  for a sinusoidal function is called the phase shift, or the horizontal displacement of the basic sine or cosine 
function. If  the graph shifts to the right. If  the graph shifts to the left. The greater the value of  the 
more the graph is shifted. Figure 11 shows that the graph of  shifts to the right by  units, which is 
more than we see in the graph of  which shifts to the right by  units. 

Figure 11 
While  relates to the horizontal shift,  indicates the vertical shift from the midline in the general formula for a 
sinusoidal function. See Figure 12. The function  has its midline at 



748     8 • Periodic Functions

Figure 12 
Any value of  other than zero shifts the graph up or down. Figure 13 compares  with 
which is shifted 2 units up on a graph. 

Figure 13 

Variations of Sine and Cosine Functions 

Given an equation in the form  or   is the phase shift and 
 is the vertical shift. 

EXAMPLE 3 

Identifying the Phase Shift of a Function 
Determine the direction and magnitude of the phase shift for 

Solution 
Let’s begin by comparing the equation to the general form 
In the given equation, notice that  and  So the phase shift is 

or  units to the left. 

Analysis 
We must pay attention to the sign in the equation for the general form of a sinusoidal function. The equation shows a 
minus sign before  Therefore  can be rewritten as  If the value of 

 is negative, the shift is to the left. 

 TRY IT #3 Determine the direction and magnitude of the phase shift for 

Access for free at openstax.org



8.1 • Graphs of the Sine and Cosine Functions     749

EXAMPLE 4 

Identifying the Vertical Shift of a Function 
Determine the direction and magnitude of the vertical shift for 

Solution 
Let’s begin by comparing the equation to the general form 
In the given equation,  so the shift is 3 units downward. 

 TRY IT #4 Determine the direction and magnitude of the vertical shift for 

...
HOW TO 

Given a sinusoidal function in the form  identify the midline, amplitude, period, and 
phase shift. 

1. Determine the amplitude as 
2. Determine the period as 
3. Determine the phase shift as 
4. Determine the midline as 

EXAMPLE 5 

Identifying the Variations of a Sinusoidal Function from an Equation 
Determine the midline, amplitude, period, and phase shift of the function 

Solution 
Let’s begin by comparing the equation to the general form 

 so the amplitude is 

Next,  so the period is 

There is no added constant inside the parentheses, so  and the phase shift is 

Finally,  so the midline is 

Analysis 
Inspecting the graph, we can determine that the period is  the midline is  and the amplitude is 3. See Figure 14. 

Figure 14 

 TRY IT #5 Determine the midline, amplitude, period, and phase shift of the function 



750     8 • Periodic Functions

EXAMPLE 6 

Identifying the Equation for a Sinusoidal Function from a Graph 
Determine the formula for the cosine function in Figure 15. 

Figure 15 

Solution 
To determine the equation, we need to identify each value in the general form of a sinusoidal function. 

The graph could represent either a sine or a cosine function that is shifted and/or reflected. When  the graph has 
an extreme point,  Since the cosine function has an extreme point for  let us write our equation in terms of a 
cosine function. 
Let’s start with the midline. We can see that the graph rises and falls an equal distance above and below  This 
value, which is the midline, is  in the equation, so 
The greatest distance above and below the midline is the amplitude. The maxima are 0.5 units above the midline and the 
minima are 0.5 units below the midline. So  Another way we could have determined the amplitude is by 
recognizing that the difference between the height of local maxima and minima is 1, so  Also, the graph is 
reflected about the x-axis so that 
The graph is not horizontally stretched or compressed, so  and the graph is not shifted horizontally, so 
Putting this all together, 

 TRY IT #6 Determine the formula for the sine function in Figure 16. 

Figure 16 

EXAMPLE 7 

Identifying the Equation for a Sinusoidal Function from a Graph 
Determine the equation for the sinusoidal function in Figure 17. 

Access for free at openstax.org



8.1 • Graphs of the Sine and Cosine Functions     751

Figure 17 

Solution 
With the highest value at 1 and the lowest value at  the midline will be halfway between at  So 
The distance from the midline to the highest or lowest value gives an amplitude of 
The period of the graph is 6, which can be measured from the peak at  to the next peak at  or from the 
distance between the lowest points. Therefore,  Using the positive value for  we find that 

So far, our equation is either  or  For the shape and shift, we have more 
than one option. We could write this as any one of the following: 

• a cosine shifted to the right 
• a negative cosine shifted to the left 
• a sine shifted to the left 
• a negative sine shifted to the right 

Choosing to use the cosine function, we observe that the peak, which would normally be at , is at , and given 
the horizontal compression factor of , we get . 

While any of these would be correct, the cosine shifts are easier to work with than the sine shifts in this case because 
they involve integer values. So our function becomes 

Again, these functions are equivalent, so both yield the same graph. 

 TRY IT #7 Write a formula for the function graphed in Figure 18. 

Figure 18 

Graphing Variations of y = sin x and y = cos x 
Throughout this section, we have learned about types of variations of sine and cosine functions and used that 



752     8 • Periodic Functions

information to write equations from graphs. Now we can use the same information to create graphs from equations. 
Instead of focusing on the general form equations 

we will let  and  and work with a simplified form of the equations in the following examples. 
...

HOW TO 

Given the function  sketch its graph. 

1. Identify the amplitude, 
2. Identify the period, 
3. Start at the origin, with the function increasing to the right if  is positive or decreasing if  is negative. 
4. At  there is a local maximum for  or a minimum for  with 
5. The curve returns to the x-axis at 
6. There is a local minimum for  (maximum for  ) at  with 
7. The curve returns again to the x-axis at 

EXAMPLE 8 

Graphing a Function and Identifying the Amplitude and Period 
Sketch a graph of 

Solution 
Let’s begin by comparing the equation to the form 
Step 1. We can see from the equation that  so the amplitude is 2. 

Step 2. The equation shows that  so the period is 

Step 3. Because  is negative, the graph descends as we move to the right of the origin. 
Step 4–7. The x-intercepts are at the beginning of one period,  the horizontal midpoints are at  and at the 
end of one period at 
The quarter points include the minimum at  and the maximum at  A local minimum will occur 2 units below 
the midline, at  and a local maximum will occur at 2 units above the midline, at  Figure 19 shows the graph 
of the function. 

Figure 19 

Access for free at openstax.org



8.1 • Graphs of the Sine and Cosine Functions     753

 TRY IT #8 Sketch a graph of  Determine the midline, amplitude, period, and phase 
shift. 

...
HOW TO 

Given a sinusoidal function with a phase shift and a vertical shift, sketch its graph. 

1. Express the function in the general form 
2. Identify the amplitude, 
3. Identify the period, 
4. Identify the phase shift, 
5. Draw the graph of  shifted to the right or left by  and up or down by 

EXAMPLE 9 

Graphing a Transformed Sinusoid 
Sketch a graph of 

Solution 
Step 1. The function is already written in general form:  This graph will have the shape of a sine 
function, starting at the midline and increasing to the right. 
Step 2.  The amplitude is 3. 
Step 3. Since  we determine the period as follows. 

The period is 8. 
Step 4. Since  the phase shift is 

The phase shift is 1 unit. 
Step 5. Figure 20 shows the graph of the function. 

Figure 20 A horizontally compressed, vertically stretched, and horizontally shifted sinusoid 

 TRY IT #9 Draw a graph of  Determine the midline, amplitude, period, and phase 
shift. 



754     8 • Periodic Functions

EXAMPLE 10 

Identifying the Properties of a Sinusoidal Function 
Given  determine the amplitude, period, phase shift, and vertical shift. Then graph the 
function. 

Solution 
Begin by comparing the equation to the general form and use the steps outlined in Example 9. 

Step 1. The function is already written in general form. 
Step 2. Since  the amplitude is 
Step 3.  so the period is  The period is 4. 

Step 4.  so we calculate the phase shift as  The phase shift is 

Step 5.  so the midline is    and the vertical shift is up 3. 

Since  is negative, the graph of the cosine function has been reflected about the x-axis. 
Figure 21 shows one cycle of the graph of the function. 

Figure 21 

Using Transformations of Sine and Cosine Functions 
We can use the transformations of sine and cosine functions in numerous applications. As mentioned at the beginning 
of the chapter, circular motion can be modeled using either the sine or cosine function. 

EXAMPLE 11 

Finding the Vertical Component of Circular Motion 
A point rotates around a circle of radius 3 centered at the origin. Sketch a graph of the y-coordinate of the point as a 
function of the angle of rotation. 

Solution 
Recall that, for a point on a circle of radius r, the y-coordinate of the point is  so in this case, we get the 
equation  The constant 3 causes a vertical stretch of the y-values of the function by a factor of 3, which 
we can see in the graph in Figure 22. 

Access for free at openstax.org



8.1 • Graphs of the Sine and Cosine Functions     755

Figure 22 

Analysis 
Notice that the period of the function is still  as we travel around the circle, we return to the point  for 

 Because the outputs of the graph will now oscillate between  and  the amplitude of the sine wave 
is 

 TRY IT #10 What is the amplitude of the function  Sketch a graph of this function. 

EXAMPLE 12 

Finding the Vertical Component of Circular Motion 
A circle with radius 3 ft is mounted with its center 4 ft off the ground. The point closest to the ground is labeled P, as 
shown in Figure 23. Sketch a graph of the height above the ground of the point  as the circle is rotated; then find a 
function that gives the height in terms of the angle of rotation. 

Figure 23 

Solution 
Sketching the height, we note that it will start 1 ft above the ground, then increase up to 7 ft above the ground, and 
continue to oscillate 3 ft above and below the center value of 4 ft, as shown in Figure 24. 



756     8 • Periodic Functions

Figure 24 
Although we could use a transformation of either the sine or cosine function, we start by looking for characteristics that 
would make one function easier to use than the other. Let’s use a cosine function because it starts at the highest or 
lowest value, while a sine function starts at the middle value. A standard cosine starts at the highest value, and this 
graph starts at the lowest value, so we need to incorporate a vertical reflection. 
Second, we see that the graph oscillates 3 above and below the center, while a basic cosine has an amplitude of 1, so this 
graph has been vertically stretched by 3, as in the last example. 
Finally, to move the center of the circle up to a height of 4, the graph has been vertically shifted up by 4. Putting these 
transformations together, we find that 

 TRY IT #11 A weight is attached to a spring that is then hung from a board, as shown in Figure 25. As the 
spring oscillates up and down, the position  of the weight relative to the board ranges from 
in. (at time  to  in. (at time  below the board. Assume the position of  is given as a 
sinusoidal function of  Sketch a graph of the function, and then find a cosine function that gives 
the position  in terms of 

Figure 25 

Access for free at openstax.org



8.1 • Graphs of the Sine and Cosine Functions     757

EXAMPLE 13 

Determining a Rider’s Height on a Ferris Wheel 
The London Eye is a huge Ferris wheel with a diameter of 135 meters (443 feet). It completes one rotation every 30 
minutes. Riders board from a platform 2 meters above the ground. Express a rider’s height above ground as a function 
of time in minutes. 

Solution 
With a diameter of 135 m, the wheel has a radius of 67.5 m. The height will oscillate with amplitude 67.5 m above and 
below the center. 
Passengers board 2 m above ground level, so the center of the wheel must be located  m above ground 
level. The midline of the oscillation will be at 69.5 m. 
The wheel takes 30 minutes to complete 1 revolution, so the height will oscillate with a period of 30 minutes. 
Lastly, because the rider boards at the lowest point, the height will start at the smallest value and increase, following the 
shape of a vertically reflected cosine curve. 

• Amplitude:  so 
• Midline:  so 
• Period:  so 
• Shape: 

An equation for the rider’s height would be 

where  is in minutes and  is measured in meters. 

 MEDIA 

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with graphs of sine and cosine functions. 

Amplitude and Period of Sine and Cosine (https://openstax.org/l/ampperiod) 
Translations of Sine and Cosine (https://openstax.org/l/translasincos) 
Graphing Sine and Cosine Transformations (https://openstax.org/l/transformsincos) 
Graphing the Sine Function (https://openstax.org/l/graphsinefunc) 

 8.1 SECTION EXERCISES 
Verbal 

1 . Why are the sine and cosine  2 . How does the graph of  3 . For the equation 
functions called periodic  compare with the  what 
functions? graph of  Explain constants affect the range 

how you could horizontally of the function and how do 
translate the graph of they affect the range? 

 to obtain 

4 . How does the range of a  5 . How can the unit circle be 
translated sine function used to construct the graph 
relate to the equation of 



758     8 • Periodic Functions

Graphical 

For the following exercises, graph two full periods of each function and state the amplitude, period, and midline. State 
the maximum and minimum y-values and their corresponding x-values on one period for  Round answers to two 
decimal places if necessary. 

6 .  7 . 8 . 

9 . 10 .  11 . 

12 .  13 . 14 . 

15 . 16 .  17 . 

For the following exercises, graph one full period of each function, starting at  For each function, state the 
amplitude, period, and midline. State the maximum and minimum y-values and their corresponding x-values on one 
period for  State the phase shift and vertical translation, if applicable. Round answers to two decimal places if 
necessary. 

18 .  19 . 20 . 

21 . 22 .  23. Determine the amplitude, midline, 
period, and an equation involving 
the sine function for the graph 
shown in Figure 26. 

Figure 26 

24 . Determine the amplitude, period, 25 . Determine the amplitude, period,  26 . Determine the amplitude, period, 
midline, and an equation involving midline, and an equation involving midline, and an equation involving 
cosine for the graph shown in cosine for the graph shown in sine for the graph shown in Figure 
Figure 27. Figure 28. 29. 

Figure 28 

Figure 29 
Figure 27 

Access for free at openstax.org



8.1 • Graphs of the Sine and Cosine Functions     759

27 . Determine the amplitude, period,  28 . Determine the amplitude, period,  29 . Determine the amplitude, period, 
midline, and an equation involving midline, and an equation involving midline, and an equation involving 
cosine for the graph shown in sine for the graph shown in Figure cosine for the graph shown in 
Figure 30. 31. Figure 32. 

Figure 31 Figure 32 

Figure 30 

30 . Determine the amplitude, period, 
midline, and an equation involving 
sine for the graph shown in Figure 
33. 

Figure 33 

Algebraic 

For the following exercises, let 
31 . On  solve 32 . On  solve 33 . Evaluate 

34 . On 35 . On  the maximum 36 . On  the minimum 
Find all values of value(s) of the function value(s) of the function 

occur(s) at what x-value(s)? occur(s) at what x-value(s)? 
37 . Show that 

This means that 
 is an odd 

function and possesses 
symmetry with respect to 
________________. 

For the following exercises, let 
38 . On  solve the 39 . On  solve 40 . On  find the 

equation x-intercepts of 



760     8 • Periodic Functions

41 . On  find the 42 . On  solve the 
x-values at which the equation 
function has a maximum 
or minimum value. 

Technology 

43 . Graph  on 44 . Graph  on 45 . Graph  on 
 Explain why the  Did the graph  and verbalize how 

graph appears as it does. appear as predicted in the the graph varies from the 
previous exercise? graph of 

46 . Graph  on 47 . Graph  on the 
the window  and window  and 
explain what the graph explain what the graph 
shows. shows. 

Real-World Applications 

48 . A Ferris wheel is 25 meters 
in diameter and boarded 
from a platform that is 1 
meter above the ground. 
The six o’clock position on 
the Ferris wheel is level 
with the loading platform. 
The wheel completes 1 full 
revolution in 10 minutes. 
The function  gives a 
person’s height in meters 
above the ground t 
minutes after the wheel 
begins to turn. 
ⓐ  Find the amplitude, 
midline, and period of 

ⓑ  Find a formula for the 
height function 
ⓒ  How high off the 
ground is a person after 5 
minutes? 

8.2 Graphs of the Other Trigonometric Functions 
Learning Objectives 
In this section, you will: 

Analyze the graph of  y=tan x. 
Graph variations of  y=tan x. 
Analyze the graphs of  y=sec x  and  y=csc x. 
Graph variations of  y=sec x  and  y=csc x. 
Analyze the graph of  y=cot x. 
Graph variations of  y=cot x. 

We know the tangent function can be used to find distances, such as the height of a building, mountain, or flagpole. But 
what if we want to measure repeated occurrences of distance? Imagine, for example, a fire truck parked next to a 
warehouse. The rotating light from the truck would travel across the wall of the warehouse in regular intervals. If the 
input is time, the output would be the distance the beam of light travels. The beam of light would repeat the distance at 
regular intervals. The tangent function can be used to approximate this distance. Asymptotes would be needed to 
illustrate the repeated cycles when the beam runs parallel to the wall because, seemingly, the beam of light could 

Access for free at openstax.org



8.2 • Graphs of the Other Trigonometric Functions     761

appear to extend forever. The graph of the tangent function would clearly illustrate the repeated intervals. In this 
section, we will explore the graphs of the tangent and other trigonometric functions. 

Analyzing the Graph of y = tan x 
We will begin with the graph of the tangent function, plotting points as we did for the sine and cosine functions. Recall 
that 

The period of the tangent function is  because the graph repeats itself on intervals of  where  is a constant. If we 
graph the tangent function on  to  we can see the behavior of the graph on one complete cycle. If we look at any 
larger interval, we will see that the characteristics of the graph repeat. 
We can determine whether tangent is an odd or even function by using the definition of tangent. 

Therefore, tangent is an odd function. We can further analyze the graphical behavior of the tangent function by looking 
at values for some of the special angles, as listed in Table 1. 

0 

undefined –1 0 1 undefined 

Table 1 

These points will help us draw our graph, but we need to determine how the graph behaves where it is undefined. If we 
look more closely at values when  we can use a table to look for a trend. Because  and 
we will evaluate  at radian measures  as shown in Table 2. 

1.3 1.5 1.55 1.56 

3.6 14.1 48.1 92.6 

Table 2 

As  approaches  the outputs of the function get larger and larger. Because  is an odd function, we see the 
corresponding table of negative values in Table 3. 

−1.3 −1.5 −1.55 −1.56 

−3.6 −14.1 −48.1 −92.6 

Table 3 

We can see that, as  approaches  the outputs get smaller and smaller. Remember that there are some values of 
for which  For example,  and  At these values, the tangent function is undefined, so 
the graph of  has discontinuities at  At these values, the graph of the tangent has vertical 
asymptotes. Figure 1 represents the graph of  The tangent is positive from 0 to  and from  to 
corresponding to quadrants I and III of the unit circle. 



762     8 • Periodic Functions

Figure 1 Graph of the tangent function 

Graphing Variations of y = tan x 
As with the sine and cosine functions, the tangent function can be described by a general equation. 

We can identify horizontal and vertical stretches and compressions using values of  and  The horizontal stretch can 
typically be determined from the period of the graph. With tangent graphs, it is often necessary to determine a vertical 
stretch using a point on the graph. 
Because there are no maximum or minimum values of a tangent function, the term amplitude cannot be interpreted as 
it is for the sine and cosine functions. Instead, we will use the phrase stretching/compressing factor when referring to 
the constant 

Features of the Graph of y = Atan(Bx) 

• The stretching factor is 
• The period is 
• The domain is all real numbers  where  such that  is an integer. 
• The range is ∞
• The asymptotes occur at  where  is an integer. 
•  is an odd function. 

Graphing One Period of a Stretched or Compressed Tangent Function 
We can use what we know about the properties of the tangent function to quickly sketch a graph of any stretched and/or 
compressed tangent function of the form  We focus on a single period of the function including the 
origin, because the periodic property enables us to extend the graph to the rest of the function’s domain if we wish. Our 
limited domain is then the interval  and the graph has vertical asymptotes at  where  On 
the graph will come up from the left asymptote at  cross through the origin, and continue to increase as it 
approaches the right asymptote at  To make the function approach the asymptotes at the correct rate, we also 
need to set the vertical scale by actually evaluating the function for at least one point that the graph will pass through. 
For example, we can use 

because 

...
HOW TO 

Given the function  graph one period. 

Access for free at openstax.org



8.2 • Graphs of the Other Trigonometric Functions     763

1. Identify the stretching factor, 
2. Identify  and determine the period, 
3. Draw vertical asymptotes at  and 
4. For  the graph approaches the left asymptote at negative output values and the right asymptote at 

positive output values (reverse for  ). 
5. Plot reference points at   and  and draw the graph through these points. 

EXAMPLE 1 

Sketching a Compressed Tangent 
Sketch a graph of one period of the function 

Solution 
First, we identify  and 

Because  and  we can find the stretching/compressing factor and period. The period is  so the 

asymptotes are at  At a quarter period from the origin, we have 

This means the curve must pass through the points   and  The only inflection point is at the 
origin. Figure 2 shows the graph of one period of the function. 

Figure 2 

 TRY IT #1 Sketch a graph of 

Graphing One Period of a Shifted Tangent Function 
Now that we can graph a tangent function that is stretched or compressed, we will add a vertical and/or horizontal (or 
phase) shift. In this case, we add  and  to the general form of the tangent function. 

The graph of a transformed tangent function is different from the basic tangent function  in several ways: 



764     8 • Periodic Functions

Features of the Graph of y = Atan(Bx−C)+D 

• The stretching factor is 
• The period is 
• The domain is  where  is an integer. 
• The range is ∞
• The vertical asymptotes occur at  where  is an odd integer. 
• There is no amplitude. 

...
HOW TO 

Given the function  sketch the graph of one period. 

1. Express the function given in the form 
2. Identify the stretching/compressing factor, 
3. Identify  and determine the period, 
4. Identify  and determine the phase shift, 
5. Draw the graph of  shifted to the right by  and up by 
6. Sketch the vertical asymptotes, which occur at  where  is an odd integer. 
7. Plot any three reference points and draw the graph through these points. 

EXAMPLE 2 

Graphing One Period of a Shifted Tangent Function 
Graph one period of the function 

Solution 
Step 1. The function is already written in the form 
Step 2.  so the stretching factor is 
Step 3.  so the period is 
Step 4.  so the phase shift is 
Step 5-7. The asymptotes are at  and  and the three recommended reference points are 

 and  The graph is shown in Figure 3. 

Figure 3 

Analysis 
Note that this is a decreasing function because 

 TRY IT #2 How would the graph in Example 2 look different if we made  instead of 

Access for free at openstax.org



8.2 • Graphs of the Other Trigonometric Functions     765

...
HOW TO 

Given the graph of a tangent function, identify horizontal and vertical stretches. 

1. Find the period  from the spacing between successive vertical asymptotes or x-intercepts. 
2. Write 
3. Determine a convenient point  on the given graph and use it to determine 

EXAMPLE 3 

Identifying the Graph of a Stretched Tangent 
Find a formula for the function graphed in Figure 4. 

Figure 4 A stretched tangent function 

Solution 
The graph has the shape of a tangent function. 
Step 1. One cycle extends from –4 to 4, so the period is  Since  we have 
Step 2. The equation must have the form 
Step 3. To find the vertical stretch  we can use the point 

Because  

This function would have a formula 

 TRY IT #3 Find a formula for the function in Figure 5. 

Figure 5 



766     8 • Periodic Functions

Analyzing the Graphs of y = sec x and y = cscx 
The secant was defined by the reciprocal identity  Notice that the function is undefined when the cosine is 
0, leading to vertical asymptotes at   etc. Because the cosine is never more than 1 in absolute value, the secant, 
being the reciprocal, will never be less than 1 in absolute value. 
We can graph  by observing the graph of the cosine function because these two functions are reciprocals of 
one another. See Figure 6. The graph of the cosine is shown as a dashed orange wave so we can see the relationship. 
Where the graph of the cosine function decreases, the graph of the secant function increases. Where the graph of the 
cosine function increases, the graph of the secant function decreases. When the cosine function is zero, the secant is 
undefined. 
The secant graph has vertical asymptotes at each value of  where the cosine graph crosses the x-axis; we show these in 
the graph below with dashed vertical lines, but will not show all the asymptotes explicitly on all later graphs involving the 
secant and cosecant. 
Note that, because cosine is an even function, secant is also an even function. That is, 

Figure 6 Graph of the secant function, 

As we did for the tangent function, we will again refer to the constant  as the stretching factor, not the amplitude. 

Features of the Graph of y = Asec(Bx) 

• The stretching factor is 
• The period is 
• The domain is  where  is an odd integer. 
• The range is ∞ ∞
• The vertical asymptotes occur at  where  is an odd integer. 
• There is no amplitude. 
•  is an even function because cosine is an even function. 

Similar to the secant, the cosecant is defined by the reciprocal identity  Notice that the function is 
undefined when the sine is 0, leading to a vertical asymptote in the graph at   etc. Since the sine is never more than 1 
in absolute value, the cosecant, being the reciprocal, will never be less than 1 in absolute value. 
We can graph  by observing the graph of the sine function because these two functions are reciprocals of one 
another. See Figure 7. The graph of sine is shown as a dashed orange wave so we can see the relationship. Where the 
graph of the sine function decreases, the graph of the cosecant function increases. Where the graph of the sine function 
increases, the graph of the cosecant function decreases. 
The cosecant graph has vertical asymptotes at each value of  where the sine graph crosses the x-axis; we show these in 

Access for free at openstax.org



8.2 • Graphs of the Other Trigonometric Functions     767

the graph below with dashed vertical lines. 
Note that, since sine is an odd function, the cosecant function is also an odd function. That is, 
The graph of cosecant, which is shown in Figure 7, is similar to the graph of secant. 

Figure 7 The graph of the cosecant function, 

Features of the Graph of y = Acsc(Bx) 

• The stretching factor is 
• The period is 
• The domain is  where  is an integer. 
• The range is ∞ ∞
• The asymptotes occur at  where  is an integer. 
•  is an odd function because sine is an odd function. 

Graphing Variations of y = sec x and y= csc x 
For shifted, compressed, and/or stretched versions of the secant and cosecant functions, we can follow similar methods 
to those we used for tangent and cotangent. That is, we locate the vertical asymptotes and also evaluate the functions 
for a few points (specifically the local extrema). If we want to graph only a single period, we can choose the interval for 
the period in more than one way. The procedure for secant is very similar, because the cofunction identity means that 
the secant graph is the same as the cosecant graph shifted half a period to the left. Vertical and phase shifts may be 
applied to the cosecant function in the same way as for the secant and other functions.The equations become the 
following. 

Features of the Graph of y = Asec(Bx−C)+D 

• The stretching factor is 
• The period is 
• The domain is  where  is an odd integer. 
• The range is ∞ ∞
• The vertical asymptotes occur at  where  is an odd integer. 
• There is no amplitude. 



768     8 • Periodic Functions

•  is an even function because cosine is an even function. 

Features of the Graph of y = Acsc(Bx−C)+D 

• The stretching factor is 
• The period is 
• The domain is  where  is an integer. 
• The range is ∞ ∞
• The vertical asymptotes occur at  where  is an integer. 
• There is no amplitude. 
•  is an odd function because sine is an odd function. 

...
HOW TO 

Given a function of the form  graph one period. 

1. Express the function given in the form 
2. Identify the stretching/compressing factor, 
3. Identify  and determine the period, 
4. Sketch the graph of 
5. Use the reciprocal relationship between  and  to draw the graph of 
6. Sketch the asymptotes. 
7. Plot any two reference points and draw the graph through these points. 

EXAMPLE 4 

Graphing a Variation of the Secant Function 
Graph one period of 

Solution 
Step 1. The given function is already written in the general form, 
Step 2.  so the stretching factor is 
Step 3.  so  The period is  units. 
Step 4. Sketch the graph of the function 
Step 5. Use the reciprocal relationship of the cosine and secant functions to draw the cosecant function. 
Steps 6–7. Sketch two asymptotes at  and  We can use two reference points, the local minimum at 

 and the local maximum at  Figure 8 shows the graph. 

Figure 8 

Access for free at openstax.org



8.2 • Graphs of the Other Trigonometric Functions     769

 TRY IT #4 Graph one period of 

 Q&A Do the vertical shift and stretch/compression affect the secant’s range? 

Yes. The range of  is ∞ ∞

...
HOW TO 

Given a function of the form  graph one period. 

1. Express the function given in the form 
2. Identify the stretching/compressing factor, 
3. Identify  and determine the period, 
4. Identify  and determine the phase shift, 
5. Draw the graph of , but shift it to the right by  and up by 
6. Sketch the vertical asymptotes, which occur at  where  is an odd integer. 

EXAMPLE 5 

Graphing a Variation of the Secant Function 
Graph one period of 

Solution 
Step 1. Express the function given in the form 
Step 2. The stretching/compressing factor is 
Step 3. The period is 

Step 4. The phase shift is 

Step 5. Draw the graph of  but shift it to the right by  and up by 
Step 6. Sketch the vertical asymptotes, which occur at  and  There is a local minimum at  and a 
local maximum at  Figure 9 shows the graph. 



770     8 • Periodic Functions

Figure 9 

 TRY IT #5 Graph one period of 

 Q&A The domain of  was given to be all  such that  for any integer  Would the domain 
of 

Yes. The excluded points of the domain follow the vertical asymptotes. Their locations show the 
horizontal shift and compression or expansion implied by the transformation to the original function’s 
input. 

...
HOW TO 

Given a function of the form  graph one period. 

1. Express the function given in the form 
2. 
3. Identify  and determine the period, 
4. Draw the graph of 
5. Use the reciprocal relationship between  and  to draw the graph of 
6. Sketch the asymptotes. 
7. Plot any two reference points and draw the graph through these points. 

EXAMPLE 6 

Graphing a Variation of the Cosecant Function 
Graph one period of 

Solution 
Step 1. The given function is already written in the general form, 
Step 2.  so the stretching factor is 3. 
Step 3.  so  The period is  units. 
Step 4. Sketch the graph of the function 
Step 5. Use the reciprocal relationship of the sine and cosecant functions to draw the cosecant function. 
Steps 6–7. Sketch three asymptotes at  and  We can use two reference points, the local maximum at 

 and the local minimum at  Figure 10 shows the graph. 

Access for free at openstax.org



8.2 • Graphs of the Other Trigonometric Functions     771

Figure 10 

 TRY IT #6 Graph one period of 

...
HOW TO 

Given a function of the form  graph one period. 

1. Express the function given in the form 
2. Identify the stretching/compressing factor, 
3. Identify  and determine the period, 
4. Identify  and determine the phase shift, 
5. Draw the graph of  but shift it to the right by  and up by 
6. Sketch the vertical asymptotes, which occur at  where  is an integer. 

EXAMPLE 7 

Graphing a Vertically Stretched, Horizontally Compressed, and Vertically Shifted Cosecant 
Sketch a graph of  What are the domain and range of this function? 

Solution 
Step 1. Express the function given in the form 
Step 2. Identify the stretching/compressing factor, 



772     8 • Periodic Functions

Step 3. The period is 

Step 4. The phase shift is 

Step 5. Draw the graph of  but shift it up 
Step 6. Sketch the vertical asymptotes, which occur at 
The graph for this function is shown in Figure 11. 

Figure 11 A transformed cosecant function 

Analysis 
The vertical asymptotes shown on the graph mark off one period of the function, and the local extrema in this interval 
are shown by dots. Notice how the graph of the transformed cosecant relates to the graph of 
shown as the orange dashed wave. 

 TRY IT #7 Given the graph of  shown in Figure 12, sketch the graph of 
 on the same axes. 

Figure 12 

Analyzing the Graph of y = cot x 
The last trigonometric function we need to explore is cotangent. The cotangent is defined by the reciprocal identity 

 Notice that the function is undefined when the tangent function is 0, leading to a vertical asymptote in 
the graph at  etc. Since the output of the tangent function is all real numbers, the output of the cotangent function is 

Access for free at openstax.org



8.2 • Graphs of the Other Trigonometric Functions     773

also all real numbers. 
We can graph  by observing the graph of the tangent function because these two functions are reciprocals of 
one another. See Figure 13. Where the graph of the tangent function decreases, the graph of the cotangent function 
increases. Where the graph of the tangent function increases, the graph of the cotangent function decreases. 
The cotangent graph has vertical asymptotes at each value of  where  we show these in the graph below with 
dashed lines. Since the cotangent is the reciprocal of the tangent,  has vertical asymptotes at all values of  where 

 and  at all values of  where  has its vertical asymptotes. 

Figure 13 The cotangent function 

Features of the Graph of y = Acot(Bx) 

• The stretching factor is 
• The period is 
• The domain is  where  is an integer. 
• The range is ∞ ∞
• The asymptotes occur at  where  is an integer. 
•  is an odd function. 

Graphing Variations of y = cot x 
We can transform the graph of the cotangent in much the same way as we did for the tangent. The equation becomes 
the following. 

Features of the Graph of y = Acot(Bx−C)+D 

• The stretching factor is 
• The period is 
• The domain is  where  is an integer. 
• The range is ∞
• The vertical asymptotes occur at  where  is an integer. 
• There is no amplitude. 
•  is an odd function because it is the quotient of even and odd functions (cosine and sine, 

respectively) 

...
HOW TO 

Given a modified cotangent function of the form  graph one period. 



774     8 • Periodic Functions

1. Express the function in the form 
2. Identify the stretching factor, 
3. Identify the period, 
4. Draw the graph of 
5. Plot any two reference points. 
6. Use the reciprocal relationship between tangent and cotangent to draw the graph of 
7. Sketch the asymptotes. 

EXAMPLE 8 

Graphing Variations of the Cotangent Function 
Determine the stretching factor, period, and phase shift of  and then sketch a graph. 

Solution 
Step 1. Expressing the function in the form  gives 
Step 2. The stretching factor is 
Step 3. The period is 
Step 4. Sketch the graph of 
Step 5. Plot two reference points. Two such points are  and 
Step 6. Use the reciprocal relationship to draw 
Step 7. Sketch the asymptotes, 

The blue graph in Figure 14 shows  and the green graph shows 

Figure 14 

...
HOW TO 

Given a modified cotangent function of the form  graph one period. 

1. Express the function in the form 
2. Identify the stretching factor, 
3. Identify the period, 
4. Identify the phase shift, 
5. Draw the graph of  shifted to the right by  and up by 
6. Sketch the asymptotes  where  is an integer. 
7. Plot any three reference points and draw the graph through these points. 

Access for free at openstax.org



8.2 • Graphs of the Other Trigonometric Functions     775

EXAMPLE 9 

Graphing a Modified Cotangent 
Sketch a graph of one period of the function 

Solution 
Step 1. The function is already written in the general form 
Step 2.  so the stretching factor is 4. 
Step 3.  so the period is 

Step 4.  so the phase shift is 

Step 5. We draw 
Step 6-7. Three points we can use to guide the graph are  and  We use the reciprocal relationship 
of tangent and cotangent to draw 
Step 8. The vertical asymptotes are  and 
The graph is shown in Figure 15. 

Figure 15 One period of a modified cotangent function 

Using the Graphs of Trigonometric Functions to Solve Real-World Problems 
Many real-world scenarios represent periodic functions and may be modeled by trigonometric functions. As an example, 
let’s return to the scenario from the section opener. Have you ever observed the beam formed by the rotating light on a 
fire truck and wondered about the movement of the light beam itself across the wall? The periodic behavior of the 
distance the light shines as a function of time is obvious, but how do we determine the distance? We can use the tangent 
function. 

EXAMPLE 10 

Using Trigonometric Functions to Solve Real-World Scenarios 
Suppose the function  marks the distance in the movement of a light beam from the top of a police car 
across a wall where  is the time in seconds and  is the distance in feet from a point on the wall directly across from the 
police car. 

ⓐ  Find and interpret the stretching factor and period.  ⓑ  Graph on the interval 
ⓒ  Evaluate  and discuss the function’s value at that input. 



776     8 • Periodic Functions

Solution 
ⓐ  We know from the general form of  that  is the stretching factor and  is the period. 

Figure 16 
The vertical stretch factor of 5 means that the beam will have moved 5 feet in the one-quarter period before or after 
the half-period mark. This corresponds to the y-value of the standard tangent function being 1 at one-quarter of the 
period away from the center of the period, multiplied by the stretching factor of 5. 

The period is  This means that every 4 seconds, the beam of light sweeps the wall. The distance from 

the spot across from the police car grows larger as the police car approaches. 

ⓑ  To graph the function, we draw an asymptote at  and use the stretching factor and period. See Figure 17 

Figure 17 

ⓒ  period:  after 1 second, the beam of has moved 5 ft from the spot across from 
the police car. 

 MEDIA 

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with graphs of other trigonometric functions. 

Graphing the Tangent (https://openstax.org/l/graphtangent) 
Graphing Cosecant and Secant (https://openstax.org/l/graphcscsec) 
Graphing the Cotangent (https://openstax.org/l/graphcot) 

 8.2 SECTION EXERCISES 
Verbal 

1 . Explain how the graph of  2 . How can the graph of  3 . Explain why the period of 
the sine function can be  be used to  is equal to 
used to graph construct the graph of 

4 . Why are there no intercepts  5 . How does the period of 
on the graph of  compare with the 

period of 

Access for free at openstax.org



8.2 • Graphs of the Other Trigonometric Functions     777

Algebraic 

For the following exercises, match each trigonometric function with one of the following graphs. 

Figure 18 
6 .  7 .  8 . 
9 . 

For the following exercises, find the period and horizontal shift of each of the functions. 
10 .  11 .  12 . 

For the following exercises, evaluate the transformed functions. 
13 . If  find  14 . If  find  15 . If  find 

16 . If  find 

For the following exercises, rewrite each expression such that the argument  is positive. 
17 .  18 . 

Graphical 

For the following exercises, sketch two periods of the graph for each of the following functions. Identify the stretching 
factor, period, and asymptotes. 
19 . 20 .  21 . 

22 .  23 . 24 . 

25 . 26 .  27 . 

28 .  29 . 30 . 

31 . 32 .  33 . 

34 .  35 . 36 . 

For the following exercises, find and graph two periods of the periodic function with the given stretching factor, 
period, and phase shift. 
37 . A tangent curve,  period of  and phase 38 . A tangent curve,  period of  and phase 

shift shift 



778     8 • Periodic Functions

For the following exercises, find an equation for the graph of each function. 
39 . 40 . 

41 . 42 . 

43 . 44 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



8.2 • Graphs of the Other Trigonometric Functions     779

45 . 

Technology 

For the following exercises, use a graphing calculator to graph two periods of the given function. Note: most graphing 
calculators do not have a cosecant button; therefore, you will need to input  as 

46 .  47 . 48 . 

49 . 50 . Graph  51 . 

What is the function shown in 
the graph? 

52 .  53 . 

Real-World Applications 

54 . The function  marks the 
distance in the movement of a light beam from a 
police car across a wall for time  in seconds, and 
distance  in feet. 
ⓐ  Graph on the interval 
ⓑ  Find and interpret the stretching factor, 
period, and asymptote. 
ⓒ  Evaluate  and  and discuss the 
function’s values at those inputs. 



780     8 • Periodic Functions

55 . Standing on the shore of a lake, a fisherman sights a 56 . A laser rangefinder is locked on a comet 
boat far in the distance to his left. Let  measured in approaching Earth. The distance  in 
radians, be the angle formed by the line of sight to the kilometers, of the comet after  days, for  in the 
ship and a line due north from his position. Assume due interval 0 to 30 days, is given by 
north is 0 and  is measured negative to the left and 
positive to the right. (See Figure 19.) The boat travels ⓐ  Graph  on the interval 
from due west to due east and, ignoring the curvature ⓑ  Evaluate  and interpret the information. 
of the Earth, the distance  in kilometers, from the ⓒ  What is the minimum distance between the 
fisherman to the boat is given by the function 

comet and Earth? When does this occur? To which 

ⓐ What is a reasonable domain for constant in the equation does this correspond? 
ⓓ  Find and discuss the meaning of any vertical 

ⓑ Graph  on this domain. 
asymptotes. 

ⓒ Find and discuss the meaning of any vertical 
asymptotes on the graph of 
ⓓ Calculate and interpret  Round to the 
second decimal place. 
ⓔ Calculate and interpret  Round to the second 
decimal place. 
ⓕ What is the minimum distance between the 
fisherman and the boat? When does this occur? 

Figure 19 

57 . A video camera is focused on a rocket on a 
launching pad 2 miles from the camera. The angle 
of elevation from the ground to the rocket after 
seconds is 
ⓐ Write a function expressing the altitude 
in miles, of the rocket above the ground after 
seconds. Ignore the curvature of the Earth. 
ⓑ Graph  on the interval 
ⓒ Evaluate and interpret the values  and 

ⓓ What happens to the values of  as 
approaches 60 seconds? Interpret the meaning of 
this in terms of the problem. 

8.3 Inverse Trigonometric Functions 
Learning Objectives 
In this section, you will: 

Understand and use the inverse sine, cosine, and tangent functions. 
Find the exact value of expressions involving the inverse sine, cosine, and tangent functions. 
Use a calculator to evaluate inverse trigonometric functions. 
Find exact values of composite functions with inverse trigonometric functions. 

Access for free at openstax.org



8.3 • Inverse Trigonometric Functions     781

For any right triangle, given one other angle and the length of one side, we can figure out what the other angles and 
sides are. But what if we are given only two sides of a right triangle? We need a procedure that leads us from a ratio of 
sides to an angle. This is where the notion of an inverse to a trigonometric function comes into play. In this section, we 
will explore the inverse trigonometric functions. 

Understanding and Using the Inverse Sine, Cosine, and Tangent Functions 
In order to use inverse trigonometric functions, we need to understand that an inverse trigonometric function “undoes” 
what the original trigonometric function “does,” as is the case with any other function and its inverse. In other words, the 
domain of the inverse function is the range of the original function, and vice versa, as summarized in Figure 1. 

Figure 1 

For example, if  then we would write  Be aware that  does not mean  The 
following examples illustrate the inverse trigonometric functions: 

• Since  then 
• Since  then 
• Since  then 

In previous sections, we evaluated the trigonometric functions at various angles, but at times we need to know what 
angle would yield a specific sine, cosine, or tangent value. For this, we need inverse functions. Recall that, for a one-to-
one function, if  then an inverse function would satisfy 
Bear in mind that the sine, cosine, and tangent functions are not one-to-one functions. The graph of each function would 
fail the horizontal line test. In fact, no periodic function can be one-to-one because each output in its range corresponds 
to at least one input in every period, and there are an infinite number of periods. As with other functions that are not 
one-to-one, we will need to restrict the domain of each function to yield a new function that is one-to-one. We choose a 
domain for each function that includes the number 0. Figure 2 shows the graph of the sine function limited to 
and the graph of the cosine function limited to 

Figure 2 (a) Sine function on a restricted domain of  (b) Cosine function on a restricted domain of 

Figure 3 shows the graph of the tangent function limited to 



782     8 • Periodic Functions

Figure 3 Tangent function on a restricted domain of 

These conventional choices for the restricted domain are somewhat arbitrary, but they have important, helpful 
characteristics. Each domain includes the origin and some positive values, and most importantly, each results in a one-
to-one function that is invertible. The conventional choice for the restricted domain of the tangent function also has the 
useful property that it extends from one vertical asymptote to the next instead of being divided into two parts by an 
asymptote. 
On these restricted domains, we can define the inverse trigonometric functions. 

• The inverse sine function  means  The inverse sine function is sometimes called the arcsine 
function, and notated 

• The inverse cosine function  means  The inverse cosine function is sometimes called the 
arccosine function, and notated 

• The inverse tangent function  means  The inverse tangent function is sometimes called the 
arctangent function, and notated 

∞
The graphs of the inverse functions are shown in Figure 4, Figure 5, and Figure 6. Notice that the output of each of these 
inverse functions is a number, an angle in radian measure. We see that  has domain  and range 

 has domain  and range  and  has domain of all real numbers and range  To find the 
domain and range of inverse trigonometric functions, switch the domain and range of the original functions. Each graph 
of the inverse trigonometric function is a reflection of the graph of the original function about the line 

Access for free at openstax.org



8.3 • Inverse Trigonometric Functions     783

Figure 4 The sine function and inverse sine (or arcsine) function 

Figure 5 The cosine function and inverse cosine (or arccosine) function 

Figure 6 The tangent function and inverse tangent (or arctangent) function 



784     8 • Periodic Functions

Relations for Inverse Sine, Cosine, and Tangent Functions 

For angles in the interval  if  then 

For angles in the interval  if  then 

For angles in the interval  if  then 

EXAMPLE 1 

Writing a Relation for an Inverse Function 
Given  write a relation involving the inverse sine. 

Solution 
Use the relation for the inverse sine. If  then . 

In this problem,  and 

 TRY IT #1 Given  write a relation involving the inverse cosine. 

Finding the Exact Value of Expressions Involving the Inverse Sine, Cosine, and 
Tangent Functions 
Now that we can identify inverse functions, we will learn to evaluate them. For most values in their domains, we must 
evaluate the inverse trigonometric functions by using a calculator, interpolating from a table, or using some other 
numerical technique. Just as we did with the original trigonometric functions, we can give exact values for the inverse 
functions when we are using the special angles, specifically  (30°),  (45°), and  (60°), and their reflections into other 
quadrants. 

...
HOW TO 

Given a “special” input value, evaluate an inverse trigonometric function. 

1. Find angle  for which the original trigonometric function has an output equal to the given input for the inverse 
trigonometric function. 

2. If  is not in the defined range of the inverse, find another angle  that is in the defined range and has the same 
sine, cosine, or tangent as  depending on which corresponds to the given inverse function. 

EXAMPLE 2 

Evaluating Inverse Trigonometric Functions for Special Input Values 
Evaluate each of the following. 

ⓐ   ⓑ   ⓒ   ⓓ  

Solution 
ⓐ  Evaluating  is the same as determining the angle that would have a sine value of  In other words, 
what angle  would satisfy  There are multiple values that would satisfy this relationship, such as  and 

 but we know we need the angle in the interval  so the answer will be  Remember that 
the inverse is a function, so for each input, we will get exactly one output. 

Access for free at openstax.org



8.3 • Inverse Trigonometric Functions     785

ⓑ  To evaluate  we know that  and  both have a sine value of  but neither is in the 

interval  For that, we need the negative angle coterminal with  

ⓒ To evaluate  we are looking for an angle in the interval  with a cosine value of  The 

angle that satisfies this is 

ⓓ  Evaluating  we are looking for an angle in the interval  with a tangent value of 1. The correct 
angle is 

 TRY IT #2 Evaluate each of the following. 

ⓐ   ⓑ   ⓒ   ⓓ  

Using a Calculator to Evaluate Inverse Trigonometric Functions 
To evaluate inverse trigonometric functions that do not involve the special angles discussed previously, we will need to 
use a calculator or other type of technology. Most scientific calculators and calculator-emulating applications have 
specific keys or buttons for the inverse sine, cosine, and tangent functions. These may be labeled, for example, SIN , 
ARCSIN, or ASIN. 
In the previous chapter, we worked with trigonometry on a right triangle to solve for the sides of a triangle given one 
side and an additional angle. Using the inverse trigonometric functions, we can solve for the angles of a right triangle 
given two sides, and we can use a calculator to find the values to several decimal places. 
In these examples and exercises, the answers will be interpreted as angles and we will use  as the independent 
variable. The value displayed on the calculator may be in degrees or radians, so be sure to set the mode appropriate to 
the application. 

EXAMPLE 3 

Evaluating the Inverse Sine on a Calculator 
Evaluate  using a calculator. 

Solution 
Because the output of the inverse function is an angle, the calculator will give us a degree value if in degree mode and a 
radian value if in radian mode. Calculators also use the same domain restrictions on the angles as we are using. 

In radian mode,  In degree mode,  Note that in calculus and beyond we will 
use radians in almost all cases. 

 TRY IT #3 Evaluate  using a calculator. 

...
HOW TO 

Given two sides of a right triangle like the one shown in Figure 7, find an angle. 



786     8 • Periodic Functions

Figure 7 

1. If one given side is the hypotenuse of length  and the side of length  adjacent to the desired angle is given, use 
the equation 

2. If one given side is the hypotenuse of length  and the side of length  opposite to the desired angle is given, use 
the equation 

3. If the two legs (the sides adjacent to the right angle) are given, then use the equation 

EXAMPLE 4 

Applying the Inverse Cosine to a Right Triangle 
Solve the triangle in Figure 8 for the angle 

Figure 8 

Solution 
Because we know the hypotenuse and the side adjacent to the angle, it makes sense for us to use the cosine function. 

 TRY IT #4 Solve the triangle in Figure 9 for the angle 

Figure 9 

Finding Exact Values of Composite Functions with Inverse Trigonometric 
Functions 
There are times when we need to compose a trigonometric function with an inverse trigonometric function. In these 
cases, we can usually find exact values for the resulting expressions without resorting to a calculator. Even when the 

Access for free at openstax.org



8.3 • Inverse Trigonometric Functions     787

input to the composite function is a variable or an expression, we can often find an expression for the output. To help 
sort out different cases, let  and  be two different trigonometric functions belonging to the set 

 and let  and  be their inverses. 

Evaluating Compositions of the Form f(f−1(y)) and f−1(f(x)) 
For any trigonometric function,  for all  in the proper domain for the given function. This follows from 
the definition of the inverse and from the fact that the range of  was defined to be identical to the domain of 
However, we have to be a little more careful with expressions of the form 

Compositions of a trigonometric function and its inverse 

∞ ∞

 Q&A Is it correct that 

No. This equation is correct if  belongs to the restricted domain  but sine is defined for all 
real input values, and for  outside the restricted interval, the equation is not correct because its 
inverse always returns a value in  The situation is similar for cosine and tangent and their 
inverses. For example, 

...
HOW TO 

Given an expression of the form f−1(f(θ)) where  evaluate. 

1. If  is in the restricted domain of 
2. If not, then find an angle  within the restricted domain of  such that  Then 

EXAMPLE 5 

Using Inverse Trigonometric Functions 
Evaluate the following: 

ⓐ   ⓑ   ⓒ   ⓓ  
Solution 

ⓐ   so 
ⓑ   but  so 
ⓒ   so 
ⓓ   but  because cosine is an even function.  so 

 TRY IT #5 Evaluate 



788     8 • Periodic Functions

Evaluating Compositions of the Form f−1(g(x)) 
Now that we can compose a trigonometric function with its inverse, we can explore how to evaluate a composition of a 
trigonometric function and the inverse of another trigonometric function. We will begin with compositions of the form 

 For special values of  we can exactly evaluate the inner function and then the outer, inverse function. 
However, we can find a more general approach by considering the relation between the two acute angles of a right 
triangle where one is  making the other  Consider the sine and cosine of each angle of the right triangle in 
Figure 10. 

Figure 10 Right triangle illustrating the cofunction relationships 

Because  we have  if  If  is not in this domain, then we need 
to find another angle that has the same cosine as  and does belong to the restricted domain; we then subtract this 
angle from  Similarly,  so  if  These are just the function-
cofunction relationships presented in another way. 

...
HOW TO 

Given functions of the form  and  evaluate them. 

1. If  then 
2. If  then find another angle  such that 

3. If  then 
4. If  then find another angle  such that 

EXAMPLE 6 

Evaluating the Composition of an Inverse Sine with a Cosine 
Evaluate 

ⓐ by direct evaluation.  ⓑ  by the method described previously. 
Solution 

ⓐ  Here, we can directly evaluate the inside of the composition. 

Now, we can evaluate the inverse function as we did earlier.  ⓑ  We have  and 

Access for free at openstax.org



8.3 • Inverse Trigonometric Functions     789

 TRY IT #6 Evaluate 

Evaluating Compositions of the Form f(g−1(x)) 
To evaluate compositions of the form  where  and  are any two of the functions sine, cosine, or tangent 
and  is any input in the domain of  we have exact formulas, such as  When we need to use 
them, we can derive these formulas by using the trigonometric relations between the angles and sides of a right 
triangle, together with the use of Pythagoras’s relation between the lengths of the sides. We can use the Pythagorean 
identity,  to solve for one when given the other. We can also use the inverse trigonometric functions 
to find compositions involving algebraic expressions. 

EXAMPLE 7 

Evaluating the Composition of a Sine with an Inverse Cosine 
Find an exact value for 

Solution 
Beginning with the inside, we can say there is some angle such that  which means  and we 
are looking for  We can use the Pythagorean identity to do this. 

Since  is in quadrant I,  must be positive, so the solution is  See Figure 11. 

Figure 11 Right triangle illustrating that if  then 

We know that the inverse cosine always gives an angle on the interval  so we know that the sine of that angle must 
be positive; therefore 

 TRY IT #7 Evaluate 

EXAMPLE 8 

Evaluating the Composition of a Sine with an Inverse Tangent 
Find an exact value for 

Solution 
While we could use a similar technique as in Example 6, we will demonstrate a different technique here. From the inside, 
we know there is an angle such that  We can envision this as the opposite and adjacent sides on a right 
triangle, as shown in Figure 12. 



790     8 • Periodic Functions

Figure 12 A right triangle with two sides known 
Using the Pythagorean Theorem, we can find the hypotenuse of this triangle. 

Now, we can evaluate the sine of the angle as the opposite side divided by the hypotenuse. 

This gives us our desired composition. 

 TRY IT #8 Evaluate 

EXAMPLE 9 

Finding the Cosine of the Inverse Sine of an Algebraic Expression 
Find a simplified expression for  for 

Solution 
We know there is an angle  such that 

Because we know that the inverse sine must give an angle on the interval  we can deduce that the cosine of 
that angle must be positive. 

 TRY IT #9 Find a simplified expression for  for 

 MEDIA 

Access this online resource for additional instruction and practice with inverse trigonometric functions. 

Access for free at openstax.org



8.3 • Inverse Trigonometric Functions     791

Evaluate Expressions Involving Inverse Trigonometric Functions (https://openstax.org/l/evalinverstrig) 

 8.3 SECTION EXERCISES 
Verbal 

1 . Why do the functions  2 . Since the functions  3 . Explain the meaning of 
 and  and 
 have are inverse functions, why is 

different ranges?  not 
equal to 

4 . Most calculators do not  5 . Why must the domain of the  6 . Discuss why this statement 
have a key to evaluate sine function,  be is incorrect: 

 Explain how this restricted to  for the  for all 
can be done using the inverse sine function to 
cosine function or the exist? 
inverse cosine function. 

7 . Determine whether the 
following statement is true 
or false and explain your 
answer: 

Algebraic 

For the following exercises, evaluate the expressions. 

8 .  9 .  10 . 

11 .  12 .  13 . 

14 .  15 .  16 . 

For the following exercises, use a calculator to evaluate each expression. Express answers to the nearest hundredth. 

17 .  18 .  19 . 

20 .  21 . 

For the following exercises, find the angle  in the given right triangle. Round answers to the nearest hundredth. 
22 . 23 . 

For the following exercises, find the exact value, if possible, without a calculator. If it is not possible, explain why. 

24 .  25 .  26 . 

27 .  28 .  29 . 



792     8 • Periodic Functions

30 .  31 .  32 . 

33 .  34 .  35 . 

36 . 

For the following exercises, find the exact value of the expression in terms of  with the help of a reference triangle. 

37 .  38 .  39 . 

40 .  41 . 

Extensions 

For the following exercises, evaluate the expression without using a calculator. Give the exact value. 

42 . 

For the following exercises, find the function if 

43 .  44 .  45 . 

46 .  47 . 

Graphical 

48 . Graph  and  49 . Graph  and 50 . Graph one cycle of 
state the domain and state the domain and  and state the 
range of the function. range of the function. domain and range of the 

function. 
51 . For what value of  does  52 . For what value of  does 

 Use a  Use a 
graphing calculator to graphing calculator to 
approximate the answer. approximate the answer. 

Real-World Applications 

53 . Suppose a 13-foot ladder is  54 . Suppose you drive 0.6  55 . An isosceles triangle has 
leaning against a building, miles on a road so that the two congruent sides of 
reaching to the bottom of a vertical distance changes length 9 inches. The 
second-floor window 12 from 0 to 150 feet. What is remaining side has a 
feet above the ground. the angle of elevation of length of 8 inches. Find the 
What angle, in radians, the road? angle that a side of 9 
does the ladder make with inches makes with the 
the building? 8-inch side. 

56 . Without using a calculator,  57 . A truss (interior beam  58 . The line  passes 
approximate the value of structure) for the roof of a through the origin in the 

 Explain house is constructed from x,y-plane. What is the 
why your answer is two identical right measure of the angle that 
reasonable. triangles. Each has a base the line makes with the 

of 12 feet and height of 4 positive x-axis? 
feet. Find the measure of 
the acute angle adjacent to 
the 4-foot side. 

Access for free at openstax.org



8.3 • Inverse Trigonometric Functions     793

59 . The line  passes  60 . What percentage grade  61 . A 20-foot ladder leans up 
through the origin in the should a road have if the against the side of a 
x,y-plane. What is the angle of elevation of the building so that the foot of 
measure of the angle that road is 4 degrees? (The the ladder is 10 feet from 
the line makes with the percentage grade is the base of the building. If 
negative x-axis? defined as the change in specifications call for the 

the altitude of the road ladder's angle of elevation 
over a 100-foot horizontal to be between 35 and 45 
distance. For example a 5% degrees, does the 
grade means that the road placement of this ladder 
rises 5 feet for every 100 satisfy safety 
feet of horizontal distance.) specifications? 

62 . Suppose a 15-foot ladder 
leans against the side of a 
house so that the angle of 
elevation of the ladder is 
42 degrees. How far is the 
foot of the ladder from the 
side of the house? 



794     8 • Chapter Review

Chapter Review 
Key Terms 
amplitude  the vertical height of a function; the constant  appearing in the definition of a sinusoidal function 
arccosine  another name for the inverse cosine; 
arcsine  another name for the inverse sine; 
arctangent  another name for the inverse tangent; 
inverse cosine function  the function  which is the inverse of the cosine function and the angle that has a 

cosine equal to a given number 
inverse sine function  the function  which is the inverse of the sine function and the angle that has a sine equal 

to a given number 
inverse tangent function  the function  which is the inverse of the tangent function and the angle that has a 

tangent equal to a given number 
midline  the horizontal line  where  appears in the general form of a sinusoidal function 
periodic function  a function  that satisfies  for a specific constant  and any value of 
phase shift  the horizontal displacement of the basic sine or cosine function; the constant 
sinusoidal function  any function that can be expressed in the form  or 

Key Equations 

Sinusoidal functions 

Shifted, compressed, and/or stretched tangent function 

Shifted, compressed, and/or stretched secant function 

Shifted, compressed, and/or stretched cosecant function 

Shifted, compressed, and/or stretched cotangent function 

Key Concepts 
8.1 Graphs of the Sine and Cosine Functions 

• Periodic functions repeat after a given value. The smallest such value is the period. The basic sine and cosine 
functions have a period of 

• The function  is odd, so its graph is symmetric about the origin. The function  is even, so its graph is 
symmetric about the y-axis. 

• The graph of a sinusoidal function has the same general shape as a sine or cosine function. 
• In the general formula for a sinusoidal function, the period is  See Example 1. 
• In the general formula for a sinusoidal function,  represents amplitude. If  the function is stretched, 

whereas if  the function is compressed. See Example 2. 
• The value  in the general formula for a sinusoidal function indicates the phase shift. See Example 3. 
• The value  in the general formula for a sinusoidal function indicates the vertical shift from the midline. See 

Example 4. 
• Combinations of variations of sinusoidal functions can be detected from an equation. See Example 5. 
• The equation for a sinusoidal function can be determined from a graph. See Example 6 and Example 7. 
• A function can be graphed by identifying its amplitude and period. See Example 8 and Example 9. 
• A function can also be graphed by identifying its amplitude, period, phase shift, and horizontal shift. See Example 

10. 
• Sinusoidal functions can be used to solve real-world problems. See Example 11, Example 12, and Example 13. 

Access for free at openstax.org



8 • Exercises     795

8.2 Graphs of the Other Trigonometric Functions 
• The tangent function has period 
•  is a tangent with vertical and/or horizontal stretch/compression and shift. See Example 

1, Example 2, and Example 3. 
• The secant and cosecant are both periodic functions with a period of   gives a shifted, 

compressed, and/or stretched secant function graph. See Example 4 and Example 5. 
•  gives a shifted, compressed, and/or stretched cosecant function graph. See Example 6 

and Example 7. 
• The cotangent function has period  and vertical asymptotes at 
• The range of cotangent is ∞ ∞  and the function is decreasing at each point in its range. 
• The cotangent is zero at 
•  is a cotangent with vertical and/or horizontal stretch/compression and shift. See 

Example 8 and Example 9. 
• Real-world scenarios can be solved using graphs of trigonometric functions. See Example 10. 

8.3 Inverse Trigonometric Functions 
• An inverse function is one that “undoes” another function. The domain of an inverse function is the range of the 

original function and the range of an inverse function is the domain of the original function. 
• Because the trigonometric functions are not one-to-one on their natural domains, inverse trigonometric functions 

are defined for restricted domains. 
• For any trigonometric function  if  then  However,  only implies  if  is 

in the restricted domain of  See Example 1. 
• Special angles are the outputs of inverse trigonometric functions for special input values; for example, 

 See Example 2. 
• A calculator will return an angle within the restricted domain of the original trigonometric function. See Example 3. 
• Inverse functions allow us to find an angle when given two sides of a right triangle. See Example 4. 
• In function composition, if the inside function is an inverse trigonometric function, then there are exact expressions; 

for example,  See Example 5. 
• If the inside function is a trigonometric function, then the only possible combinations are  if 

 and  if  See Example 6 and Example 7. 
• When evaluating the composition of a trigonometric function with an inverse trigonometric function, draw a 

reference triangle to assist in determining the ratio of sides that represents the output of the trigonometric 
function. See Example 8. 

• When evaluating the composition of a trigonometric function with an inverse trigonometric function, you may use 
trig identities to assist in determining the ratio of sides. See Example 9. 

Exercises 
Review Exercises 
Graphs of the Sine and Cosine Functions 
For the following exercises, graph the functions for two periods and determine the amplitude or stretching factor, 
period, midline equation, and asymptotes. 

1 . 2 .  3 . 

4 .  5 . 6 . 

7 . 8 . 

Graphs of the Other Trigonometric Functions 

For the following exercises, graph the functions for two periods and determine the amplitude or stretching factor, 
period, midline equation, and asymptotes. 

9 . 10 .  11 . 

12 . 



796     8 • Exercises

For the following exercises, graph two full periods. Identify the period, the phase shift, the amplitude, and asymptotes. 

13 . 14 .  15 . 

16 .  17 . 18 . 

For the following exercises, use this scenario: The population of a city has risen and fallen over a 20-year interval. Its 
population may be modeled by the following function:  where the domain is the years 
since 1980 and the range is the population of the city. 
19 . What is the largest and  20 . Graph the function on the  21 . What are the amplitude, 

smallest population the domain of . period, and phase shift for 
city may have? the function? 

22 . Over this domain, when  23 . What is the predicted 
does the population reach population in 2007? 2010? 
18,000? 13,000? 

For the following exercises, suppose a weight is attached to a spring and bobs up and down, exhibiting symmetry. 
24 . Suppose the graph of the displacement function is  25 . At time = 0, what is the displacement of the 

shown in Figure 1, where the values on the x-axis weight? 
represent the time in seconds and the y-axis 
represents the displacement in inches. Give the 
equation that models the vertical displacement of 
the weight on the spring. 

Figure 1 

26 . At what time does the displacement from the  27 . What is the time required for the weight to return 
equilibrium point equal zero? to its initial height of 5 inches? In other words, 

what is the period for the displacement function? 

Inverse Trigonometric Functions 

For the following exercises, find the exact value without the aid of a calculator. 

28 .  29 .  30 . 

31 .  32 .  33 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



8 • Exercises     797

34 .  35 .  36 . 

37 .  38 .  39 . Graph  and 
 on the 

interval  and explain 
any observations. 

40 . Graph  and  41 . Graph the function 
 and explain 

any observations. on the interval  and 
compare the graph to the 
graph of  on 
the same interval. Describe 
any observations. 

Practice Test 
For the following exercises, sketch the graph of each function for two full periods. Determine the amplitude, the period, 
and the equation for the midline. 
1 . 2 .  3 . 

4 .  5 . 6 . 

7 . 8 .  9 . 

10 .  11 . 12 . 

13 . 

For the following exercises, determine the amplitude, period, and midline of the graph, and then find a formula for the 
function. 
14 . Give in terms of a sine function. 15 . Give in terms of a sine function. 



798     8 • Exercises

16 . Give in terms of a tangent 
function. 

For the following exercises, find the amplitude, period, phase shift, and midline. 

17 .  18 . 

19 . The outside temperature over the course of a day  20 . Water is pumped into a storage bin and empties 
can be modeled as a sinusoidal function. Suppose according to a periodic rate. The depth of the 
you know the temperature is 68°F at midnight and water is 3 feet at its lowest at 2:00 a.m. and 71 
the high and low temperatures during the day are feet at its highest, which occurs every 5 hours. 
80°F and 56°F, respectively. Assuming  is the Write a cosine function that models the depth of 
number of hours since midnight, find a function the water as a function of time, and then graph 
for the temperature,  in terms of the function for one period. 

For the following exercises, find the period and horizontal shift of each function. 

21 .  22 . 

23 . Write the equation for the graph in Figure 1 in  24 . If  find 
terms of the secant function and give the period 
and phase shift. 

Figure 1 

25 . If  find 

Access for free at openstax.org



8 • Exercises     799

For the following exercises, graph the functions on the specified window and answer the questions. 

26 . Graph  27 . Graph 28 . Graph  on 
 on  and explain any 

on the viewing window the following domains in observations. 
 by   and 

Approximate the graph’s Suppose this function 
period. models sound waves. Why 

would these views look so 
different? 

For the following exercises, let 

29 . What is the largest possible  30 . What is the smallest  31 . Where is the function 
value for possible value for increasing on the interval 

For the following exercises, find and graph one period of the periodic function with the given amplitude, period, and 
phase shift. 
32 . Sine curve with amplitude  33 . Cosine curve with 

3, period  and phase amplitude 2, period  and 
shift phase shift 

For the following exercises, graph the function. Describe the graph and, wherever applicable, any periodic behavior, 
amplitude, asymptotes, or undefined points. 

34 .  35 . 

For the following exercises, find the exact value. 

36 .  37 .  38 . 

39 .  40 .  41 . 

42 .  43 . 

For the following exercises, suppose  Evaluate the following expressions. 

44 . 45 . 
46 . Given Figure 2, find the measure of angle  to 

three decimal places. Answer in radians. 

Figure 2 



800     8 • Exercises

For the following exercises, determine whether the equation is true or false. 

47 .  48 .  49 . The grade of a road is 7%. 
This means that for every 
horizontal distance of 100 
feet on the road, the 
vertical rise is 7 feet. Find 
the angle the road makes 
with the horizontal in 
radians. 

Access for free at openstax.org



9 • Introduction to Trigonometric Identities and Equations          801

9 TRIGONOMETRIC IDENTITIES AND 
EQUATIONS 

Tennis players can create advantages by changing the angles of their shots. The technology used to decide close calls 
also relies heavily on mathematics. (credit: modification of "From the 2013 US Open" by Edwin Martinez/flickr) 

Chapter Outline 
9.1 Verifying Trigonometric Identities and Using Trigonometric Identities to Simplify Trigonometric Expressions 
9.2 Sum and Difference Identities 
9.3 Double-Angle, Half-Angle, and Reduction Formulas 
9.4 Sum-to-Product and Product-to-Sum Formulas 
9.5 Solving Trigonometric Equations 

Introduction to Trigonometric Identities and Equations 
When we think of tennis as a game of angles, we may imagine players racing up to the net, creating options to deliver 
powerful cross shots that will leave their opponent stumbling toward the line. This is an exciting and effective method of 
play, though it brings greater risk. 
But while the excitement of the game interplays with all types of geometry, some of the newest innovations make even 
more use of mathematics. With balls traveling well over 100 miles per hour judges cannot always discern the centimeter 
or millimeters of difference between a ball that is in or out of bounds. Professional tennis was among the first sports to 
rely on an advanced tracking system called Hawk-Eye to help make close calls. The system uses several high-resolution 
cameras that are able to monitor and the ball's movement and its position on the court. Using the images from several 
cameras at once, the system's computers use trigonometric calculations to triangulate the ball's exact position and, 
essentially, turn a series of two-dimensional images into a three-dimensional one. Also, since the ball travels faster than 
the cameras' frame rate, the system also must make predictions to show where a ball is at all times. These technologies 
generally provide a more accurate game that builds more confidence and fairness. Similar technologies are used for 
baseball, and automated strike-calling is under discussion. 

9.1 Verifying Trigonometric Identities and Using Trigonometric 
Identities to Simplify Trigonometric Expressions 
Learning Objectives 
In this section, you will: 

Verify the fundamental trigonometric identities. 
Simplify trigonometric expressions using algebra and the identities. 



802     9 • Trigonometric Identities and Equations

Figure 1 International passports and travel documents 
In espionage movies, we see international spies with multiple passports, each claiming a different identity. However, we 
know that each of those passports represents the same person. The trigonometric identities act in a similar manner to 
multiple passports—there are many ways to represent the same trigonometric expression. Just as a spy will choose an 
Italian passport when traveling to Italy, we choose the identity that applies to the given scenario when solving a 
trigonometric equation. 
In this section, we will begin an examination of the fundamental trigonometric identities, including how we can verify 
them and how we can use them to simplify trigonometric expressions. 

Verifying the Fundamental Trigonometric Identities 
Identities enable us to simplify complicated expressions. They are the basic tools of trigonometry used in solving 
trigonometric equations, just as factoring, finding common denominators, and using special formulas are the basic tools 
of solving algebraic equations. In fact, we use algebraic techniques constantly to simplify trigonometric expressions. 
Basic properties and formulas of algebra, such as the difference of squares formula and the perfect squares formula, will 
simplify the work involved with trigonometric expressions and equations. We already know that all of the trigonometric 
functions are related because they all are defined in terms of the unit circle. Consequently, any trigonometric identity can 
be written in many ways. 
To verify the trigonometric identities, we usually start with the more complicated side of the equation and essentially 
rewrite the expression until it has been transformed into the same expression as the other side of the equation. 
Sometimes we have to factor expressions, expand expressions, find common denominators, or use other algebraic 
strategies to obtain the desired result. In this first section, we will work with the fundamental identities: the Pythagorean 
identities, the even-odd identities, the reciprocal identities, and the quotient identities. 
We will begin with the Pythagorean identities (see Table 1), which are equations involving trigonometric functions 
based on the properties of a right triangle. We have already seen and used the first of these identifies, but now we will 
also use additional identities. 

Pythagorean Identities 

Table 1 

The second and third identities can be obtained by manipulating the first. The identity  is found by 
rewriting the left side of the equation in terms of sine and cosine. 

Prove: 

Access for free at openstax.org



9.1 • Verifying Trigonometric Identities and Using Trigonometric Identities to Simplify Trigonometric Expressions     803

Similarly,  can be obtained by rewriting the left side of this identity in terms of sine and cosine. This 
gives 

Recall that we determined which trigonometric functions are odd and which are even. The next set of fundamental 
identities is the set of even-odd identities. The even-odd identities relate the value of a trigonometric function at a given 
angle to the value of the function at the opposite angle. (See Table 2). 

Even-Odd Identities 

Table 2 

Recall that an odd function is one in which  for all  in the domain of  The sine function is an odd 
function because  The graph of an odd function is symmetric about the origin. For example, consider 
corresponding inputs of  and  The output of  is opposite the output of  Thus, 

This is shown in Figure 2. 

Figure 2 Graph of 
Recall that an even function is one in which 

The graph of an even function is symmetric about the y-axis. The cosine function is an even function because 
 For example, consider corresponding inputs  and  The output of  is the same as the 

output of  Thus, 



804     9 • Trigonometric Identities and Equations

See Figure 3. 

Figure 3 Graph of 
For all  in the domain of the sine and cosine functions, respectively, we can state the following: 

• Since  sine is an odd function. 
• Since,  cosine is an even function. 

The other even-odd identities follow from the even and odd nature of the sine and cosine functions. For example, 
consider the tangent identity,  We can interpret the tangent of a negative angle as 

 Tangent is therefore an odd function, which means that  for 
all  in the domain of the tangent function. 
The cotangent identity,  also follows from the sine and cosine identities. We can interpret the 
cotangent of a negative angle as  Cotangent is therefore an odd function, which 
means that  for all  in the domain of the cotangent function. 
The cosecant function is the reciprocal of the sine function, which means that the cosecant of a negative angle will be 
interpreted as  The cosecant function is therefore odd. 

Finally, the secant function is the reciprocal of the cosine function, and the secant of a negative angle is interpreted as 
 The secant function is therefore even. 

To sum up, only two of the trigonometric functions, cosine and secant, are even. The other four functions are odd, 
verifying the even-odd identities. 
The next set of fundamental identities is the set of reciprocal identities, which, as their name implies, relate 
trigonometric functions that are reciprocals of each other. See Table 3. Recall that we first encountered these identities 
when defining trigonometric functions from right angles in Right Angle Trigonometry. 

Reciprocal Identities 

Table 3 

The final set of identities is the set of quotient identities, which define relationships among certain trigonometric 

Access for free at openstax.org



9.1 • Verifying Trigonometric Identities and Using Trigonometric Identities to Simplify Trigonometric Expressions     805

functions and can be very helpful in verifying other identities. See Table 4. 

Quotient Identities 

Table 4 

The reciprocal and quotient identities are derived from the definitions of the basic trigonometric functions. 

Summarizing Trigonometric Identities 

The Pythagorean identities are based on the properties of a right triangle. 

The even-odd identities relate the value of a trigonometric function at a given angle to the value of the function at 
the opposite angle. 

The reciprocal identities define reciprocals of the trigonometric functions. 

The quotient identities define the relationship among the trigonometric functions. 

EXAMPLE 1 

Graphing the Expressions of an Identity 
Graph both sides of the identity  In other words, on the graphing calculator, graph  and 



806     9 • Trigonometric Identities and Equations

Solution 
See Figure 4. 

Figure 4 

Analysis 
We see only one graph because both expressions generate the same image. One is on top of the other. This is a good 
way to confirm an identity verified with analytical means. If both expressions give the same graph, then they are most 
likely identities. 

...
HOW TO 

Given a trigonometric identity, verify that it is true. 

1. Work on one side of the equation. It is usually better to start with the more complex side, as it is easier to 
simplify than to build. 

2. Look for opportunities to factor expressions, square a binomial, or add fractions. 
3. Noting which functions are in the final expression, look for opportunities to use the identities and make the 

proper substitutions. 
4. If these steps do not yield the desired result, try converting all terms to sines and cosines. 

EXAMPLE 2 

Verifying a Trigonometric Identity 
Verify 

Solution 
We will start on the left side, as it is the more complicated side: 

Analysis 
This identity was fairly simple to verify, as it only required writing  in terms of  and 

Access for free at openstax.org



9.1 • Verifying Trigonometric Identities and Using Trigonometric Identities to Simplify Trigonometric Expressions     807

 TRY IT #1 Verify the identity 

EXAMPLE 3 

Verifying the Equivalency Using the Even-Odd Identities 
Verify the following equivalency using the even-odd identities: 

Solution 
Working on the left side of the equation, we have 

EXAMPLE 4 

Verifying a Trigonometric Identity Involving sec2θ 
Verify the identity 

Solution 
As the left side is more complicated, let’s begin there. 

There is more than one way to verify an identity. Here is another possibility. Again, we can start with the left side. 

Analysis 
In the first method, we used the identity  and continued to simplify. In the second method, we split the 
fraction, putting both terms in the numerator over the common denominator. This problem illustrates that there are 
multiple ways we can verify an identity. Employing some creativity can sometimes simplify a procedure. As long as the 
substitutions are correct, the answer will be the same. 

 TRY IT #2 Show that 



808     9 • Trigonometric Identities and Equations

EXAMPLE 5 

Creating and Verifying an Identity 
Create an identity for the expression  by rewriting strictly in terms of sine. 

Solution 
There are a number of ways to begin, but here we will use the quotient and reciprocal identities to rewrite the 
expression: 

Thus, 

EXAMPLE 6 

Verifying an Identity Using Algebra and Even/Odd Identities 
Verify the identity: 

Solution 
Let’s start with the left side and simplify: 

 TRY IT #3 Verify the identity 

EXAMPLE 7 

Verifying an Identity Involving Cosines and Cotangents 
Verify the identity: 

Solution 
We will work on the left side of the equation. 

Access for free at openstax.org



9.1 • Verifying Trigonometric Identities and Using Trigonometric Identities to Simplify Trigonometric Expressions     809

 

Using Algebra to Simplify Trigonometric Expressions 
We have seen that algebra is very important in verifying trigonometric identities, but it is just as critical in simplifying 
trigonometric expressions before solving. Being familiar with the basic properties and formulas of algebra, such as the 
difference of squares formula, the perfect square formula, or substitution, will simplify the work involved with 
trigonometric expressions and equations. 
For example, the equation  resembles the equation  which uses the 
factored form of the difference of squares. Using algebra makes finding a solution straightforward and familiar. We can 
set each factor equal to zero and solve. This is one example of recognizing algebraic patterns in trigonometric 
expressions or equations. 

Another example is the difference of squares formula,  which is widely used in many areas 
other than mathematics, such as engineering, architecture, and physics. We can also create our own identities by 
continually expanding an expression and making the appropriate substitutions. Using algebraic properties and formulas 
makes many trigonometric equations easier to understand and solve. 

EXAMPLE 8 

Writing the Trigonometric Expression as an Algebraic Expression 
Write the following trigonometric expression as an algebraic expression: 

Solution 
Notice that the pattern displayed has the same form as a standard quadratic expression,  Letting 

 we can rewrite the expression as follows: 

This expression can be factored as  If it were set equal to zero and we wanted to solve the equation, we 
would use the zero factor property and solve each factor for  At this point, we would replace  with  and solve for 

EXAMPLE 9 

Rewriting a Trigonometric Expression Using the Difference of Squares 
Rewrite the trigonometric expression using the difference of squares: 

Solution 
Notice that both the coefficient and the trigonometric expression in the first term are squared, and the square of the 
number 1 is 1. This is the difference of squares. 

Analysis 
If this expression were written in the form of an equation set equal to zero, we could solve each factor using the zero 
factor property. We could also use substitution like we did in the previous problem and let  rewrite the 
expression as  and factor  Then replace  with  and solve for the angle. 



810     9 • Trigonometric Identities and Equations

 TRY IT #4 Rewrite the trigonometric expression using the difference of squares: 

EXAMPLE 10 

Simplify by Rewriting and Using Substitution 
Simplify the expression by rewriting and using identities: 

Solution 
We can start with the Pythagorean identity. 

Now we can simplify by substituting  for  We have 

 TRY IT #5 Use algebraic techniques to verify the identity: 

(Hint: Multiply the numerator and denominator on the left side by 

 MEDIA 

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with the fundamental trigonometric identities. 

Fundamental Trigonometric Identities (https://openstax.org/l/funtrigiden) 
Verifying Trigonometric Identities (https://openstax.org/l/verifytrigiden) 

 9.1 SECTION EXERCISES 
Verbal 

1 . We know  is an 2 . Examine the graph of  3 . After examining the 
even function, and  on the interval reciprocal identity for 

 and  How can we tell explain why the function is 
 are odd whether the function is even undefined at certain points. 

functions. What about or odd by only observing the 
graph of 

and  Are they 
even, odd, or neither? Why? 

4 . All of the Pythagorean 
identities are related. 
Describe how to manipulate 
the equations to get from 

 to the 
other forms. 

Algebraic 

For the following exercises, use the fundamental identities to fully simplify the expression. 

5 .  6 .  7 . 
8 .  9 . 

10 .  11 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



9.2 • Sum and Difference Identities     811

12 .  13 . 

14 .  15 . 

For the following exercises, simplify the first trigonometric expression by writing the simplified form in terms of the 
second expression. 
16 .  17 .  18 . 

19 .  20 . 

21 .  22 . 

23 .  24 . 

25 .  26 .  27 . 
28 . 

For the following exercises, verify the identity. 

29 . 30 . 

31 .  32 . 

33 . 

Extensions 

For the following exercises, prove or disprove the identity. 

34 .  35 . 

36 .  37 . 

38 .  39 . 

For the following exercises, determine whether the identity is true or false. If false, find an appropriate equivalent 
expression. 

40 .  41 .  42 . 

9.2 Sum and Difference Identities 
Learning Objectives 
In this section, you will: 

Use sum and difference formulas for cosine. 
Use sum and difference formulas for sine. 
Use sum and difference formulas for tangent. 
Use sum and difference formulas for cofunctions. 
Use sum and difference formulas to verify identities. 



812     9 • Trigonometric Identities and Equations

Figure 1 Mount McKinley, in Denali National Park, Alaska, rises 20,310 feet (6,190 m) above sea level. It is the highest 
peak in North America. (credit: Daniel A. Leifheit, Flickr) 
How can the height of a mountain be measured? What about the distance from Earth to the sun? Like many seemingly 
impossible problems, we rely on mathematical formulas to find the answers. The trigonometric identities, commonly 
used in mathematical proofs, have had real-world applications for centuries, including their use in calculating long 
distances. 
The trigonometric identities we will examine in this section can be traced to a Persian astronomer who lived around 950 
AD, but the ancient Greeks discovered these same formulas much earlier and stated them in terms of chords. These are 
special equations or postulates, true for all values input to the equations, and with innumerable applications. 
In this section, we will learn techniques that will enable us to solve problems such as the ones presented above. The 
formulas that follow will simplify many trigonometric expressions and equations. Keep in mind that, throughout this 
section, the term formula is used synonymously with the word identity. 

Using the Sum and Difference Formulas for Cosine 
Finding the exact value of the sine, cosine, or tangent of an angle is often easier if we can rewrite the given angle in 
terms of two angles that have known trigonometric values. We can use the special angles, which we can review in the 
unit circle shown in Figure 2. 

Figure 2 The Unit Circle 
We will begin with the sum and difference formulas for cosine, so that we can find the cosine of a given angle if we can 
break it up into the sum or difference of two of the special angles. See Table 1. 

Sum formula for cosine 

Difference formula for cosine 

Table 1 

Access for free at openstax.org



9.2 • Sum and Difference Identities     813

First, we will prove the difference formula for cosines. Let’s consider two points on the unit circle. See Figure 3. Point  is 
at an angle  from the positive x-axis with coordinates  and point  is at an angle of  from the positive 
x-axis with coordinates  Note the measure of angle  is 
Label two more points:  at an angle of  from the positive x-axis with coordinates  and 
point  with coordinates  Triangle  is a rotation of triangle  and thus the distance from  to  is the 
same as the distance from  to 

Figure 3 
We can find the distance from  to  using the distance formula. 

Then we apply the Pythagorean identity and simplify. 

Similarly, using the distance formula we can find the distance from  to 

Applying the Pythagorean identity and simplifying we get: 

Because the two distances are the same, we set them equal to each other and simplify. 

Finally we subtract  from both sides and divide both sides by 

Thus, we have the difference formula for cosine. We can use similar methods to derive the cosine of the sum of two 
angles. 



814     9 • Trigonometric Identities and Equations

Sum and Difference Formulas for Cosine 

These formulas can be used to calculate the cosine of sums and differences of angles. 

...
HOW TO 

Given two angles, find the cosine of the difference between the angles. 

1. Write the difference formula for cosine. 
2. Substitute the values of the given angles into the formula. 
3. Simplify. 

EXAMPLE 1 

Finding the Exact Value Using the Formula for the Cosine of the Difference of Two Angles 
Using the formula for the cosine of the difference of two angles, find the exact value of 

Solution 
Begin by writing the formula for the cosine of the difference of two angles. Then substitute the given values. 

Keep in mind that we can always check the answer using a graphing calculator in radian mode. 

 TRY IT #1 Find the exact value of 

EXAMPLE 2 

Finding the Exact Value Using the Formula for the Sum of Two Angles for Cosine 
Find the exact value of 

Solution 
As  we can evaluate  as 

Access for free at openstax.org



9.2 • Sum and Difference Identities     815

Keep in mind that we can always check the answer using a graphing calculator in degree mode. 

Analysis 
Note that we could have also solved this problem using the fact that 

 TRY IT #2 Find the exact value of 

Using the Sum and Difference Formulas for Sine 
The sum and difference formulas for sine can be derived in the same manner as those for cosine, and they resemble the 
cosine formulas. 

Sum and Difference Formulas for Sine 

These formulas can be used to calculate the sines of sums and differences of angles. 

...
HOW TO 

Given two angles, find the sine of the difference between the angles. 

1. Write the difference formula for sine. 
2. Substitute the given angles into the formula. 
3. Simplify. 

EXAMPLE 3 

Using Sum and Difference Identities to Evaluate the Difference of Angles 
Use the sum and difference identities to evaluate the difference of the angles and show that part a equals part b. 

ⓐ   ⓑ  



816     9 • Trigonometric Identities and Equations

Solution 
ⓐ  Let’s begin by writing the formula and substitute the given angles. 

Next, we need to find the values of the trigonometric expressions. 

Now we can substitute these values into the equation and simplify. 

ⓑ  Again, we write the formula and substitute the given angles. 

Next, we find the values of the trigonometric expressions. 

Now we can substitute these values into the equation and simplify. 

EXAMPLE 4 

Finding the Exact Value of an Expression Involving an Inverse Trigonometric Function 
Find the exact value of  Then check the answer with a graphing calculator. 

Solution 
The pattern displayed in this problem is  Let  and  Then we can write 

We will use the Pythagorean identities to find  and 

Access for free at openstax.org



9.2 • Sum and Difference Identities     817

Using the sum formula for sine, 

Using the Sum and Difference Formulas for Tangent 
Finding exact values for the tangent of the sum or difference of two angles is a little more complicated, but again, it is a 
matter of recognizing the pattern. 
Finding the sum of two angles formula for tangent involves taking quotient of the sum formulas for sine and cosine and 
simplifying. Recall, 

Let’s derive the sum formula for tangent. 

We can derive the difference formula for tangent in a similar way. 

Sum and Difference Formulas for Tangent 

The sum and difference formulas for tangent are: 



818     9 • Trigonometric Identities and Equations

...
HOW TO 

Given two angles, find the tangent of the sum of the angles. 

1. Write the sum formula for tangent. 
2. Substitute the given angles into the formula. 
3. Simplify. 

EXAMPLE 5 

Finding the Exact Value of an Expression Involving Tangent 
Find the exact value of 

Solution 
Let’s first write the sum formula for tangent and then substitute the given angles into the formula. 

Next, we determine the individual function values within the formula: 

So we have 

 TRY IT #3 Find the exact value of 

EXAMPLE 6 

Finding Multiple Sums and Differences of Angles 
Given  find 

ⓐ   ⓑ   ⓒ   ⓓ  

Access for free at openstax.org



9.2 • Sum and Difference Identities     819

Solution 
We can use the sum and difference formulas to identify the sum or difference of angles when the ratio of sine, cosine, or 
tangent is provided for each of the individual angles. To do so, we construct what is called a reference triangle to help 
find each component of the sum and difference formulas. 

ⓐ  To find  we begin with  and  The side opposite  has length 3, the hypotenuse has 
length 5, and  is in the first quadrant. See Figure 4. Using the Pythagorean Theorem, we can find the length of side 

Figure 4 

Since  and  the side adjacent to  is  the hypotenuse is 13, and  is in the third quadrant. 
See Figure 5. Again, using the Pythagorean Theorem, we have 

Since  is in the third quadrant, 



820     9 • Trigonometric Identities and Equations

Figure 5 
The next step is finding the cosine of  and the sine of  The cosine of  is the adjacent side over the hypotenuse. We 
can find it from the triangle in Figure 5:  We can also find the sine of  from the triangle in Figure 5, as 
opposite side over the hypotenuse:  Now we are ready to evaluate 

ⓑ  We can find  in a similar manner. We substitute the values according to the formula. 

ⓒ  For  if  and  then 

If  and  then 

Then, 

Access for free at openstax.org



9.2 • Sum and Difference Identities     821

ⓓ  To find  we have the values we need. We can substitute them in and evaluate. 

Analysis 
A common mistake when addressing problems such as this one is that we may be tempted to think that  and  are 
angles in the same triangle, which of course, they are not. Also note that 

Using Sum and Difference Formulas for Cofunctions 
Now that we can find the sine, cosine, and tangent functions for the sums and differences of angles, we can use them to 
do the same for their cofunctions. You may recall from Right Triangle Trigonometry that, if the sum of two positive 
angles is  those two angles are complements, and the sum of the two acute angles in a right triangle is  so they are 
also complements. In Figure 6, notice that if one of the acute angles is labeled as  then the other acute angle must be 
labeled 

Notice also that  which is opposite over hypotenuse. Thus, when two angles are complementary, 
we can say that the sine of  equals the cofunction of the complement of  Similarly, tangent and cotangent are 
cofunctions, and secant and cosecant are cofunctions. 

Figure 6 
From these relationships, the cofunction identities are formed. Recall that you first encountered these identities in The 
Unit Circle: Sine and Cosine Functions. 



822     9 • Trigonometric Identities and Equations

Cofunction Identities 

The cofunction identities are summarized in Table 2. 

Table 2 

Notice that the formulas in the table may also be justified algebraically using the sum and difference formulas. For 
example, using 

we can write 

EXAMPLE 7 

Finding a Cofunction with the Same Value as the Given Expression 
Write  in terms of its cofunction. 

Solution 
The cofunction of  Thus, 

 TRY IT #4 Write  in terms of its cofunction. 

Using the Sum and Difference Formulas to Verify Identities 
Verifying an identity means demonstrating that the equation holds for all values of the variable. It helps to be very 
familiar with the identities or to have a list of them accessible while working the problems. Reviewing the general rules 
presented earlier may help simplify the process of verifying an identity. 

...
HOW TO 

Given an identity, verify using sum and difference formulas. 

1. Begin with the expression on the side of the equal sign that appears most complex. Rewrite that expression until 
it matches the other side of the equal sign. Occasionally, we might have to alter both sides, but working on only 
one side is the most efficient. 

2. Look for opportunities to use the sum and difference formulas. 
3. Rewrite sums or differences of quotients as single quotients. 
4. If the process becomes cumbersome, rewrite the expression in terms of sines and cosines. 

Access for free at openstax.org



9.2 • Sum and Difference Identities     823

EXAMPLE 8 

Verifying an Identity Involving Sine 
Verify the identity 

Solution 
We see that the left side of the equation includes the sines of the sum and the difference of angles. 

We can rewrite each using the sum and difference formulas. 

We see that the identity is verified. 

EXAMPLE 9 

Verifying an Identity Involving Tangent 
Verify the following identity. 

Solution 
We can begin by rewriting the numerator on the left side of the equation. 

We see that the identity is verified. In many cases, verifying tangent identities can successfully be accomplished by 
writing the tangent in terms of sine and cosine. 

 TRY IT #5 Verify the identity: 

EXAMPLE 10 

Using Sum and Difference Formulas to Solve an Application Problem 
Let  and  denote two non-vertical intersecting lines, and let  denote the acute angle between  and  See 
Figure 7. Show that 

where  and  are the slopes of  and  respectively. (Hint: Use the fact that  and  ) 



824     9 • Trigonometric Identities and Equations

Figure 7 

Solution 
Using the difference formula for tangent, this problem does not seem as daunting as it might. 

EXAMPLE 11 

Investigating a Guy-wire Problem 
For a climbing wall, a guy-wire  is attached 47 feet high on a vertical pole. Added support is provided by another guy-
wire  attached 40 feet above ground on the same pole. If the wires are attached to the ground 50 feet from the pole, 
find the angle  between the wires. See Figure 8. 

Figure 8 

Solution 
Let’s first summarize the information we can gather from the diagram. As only the sides adjacent to the right angle are 
known, we can use the tangent function. Notice that  and  We can then use difference 
formula for tangent. 

Now, substituting the values we know into the formula, we have 

Use the distributive property, and then simplify the functions. 

Access for free at openstax.org



9.2 • Sum and Difference Identities     825

Now we can calculate the angle in degrees. 

Analysis 

Occasionally, when an application appears that includes a right triangle, we may think that solving is a matter of 
applying the Pythagorean Theorem. That may be partially true, but it depends on what the problem is asking and what 
information is given. 

 MEDIA 

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with sum and difference identities. 

Sum and Difference Identities for Cosine (https://openstax.org/l/sumdifcos) 
Sum and Difference Identities for Sine (https://openstax.org/l/sumdifsin) 
Sum and Difference Identities for Tangent (https://openstax.org/l/sumdiftan) 

 9.2 SECTION EXERCISES 
Verbal 

1 . Explain the basis for the  2 . Is there only one way to  3 . Explain to someone who has 
cofunction identities and evaluate  Explain forgotten the even-odd 
when they apply. how to set up the solution in properties of sinusoidal 

two different ways, and then functions how the addition 
compute to make sure they and subtraction formulas 
give the same answer. can determine this 

characteristic for 
 and 
 (Hint: 

 ) 

Algebraic 

For the following exercises, find the exact value. 

4 .  5 .  6 . 

7 .  8 .  9 . 

For the following exercises, rewrite in terms of  and 

10 .  11 .  12 . 

13 . 

For the following exercises, simplify the given expression. 
14 .  15 .  16 . 



826     9 • Trigonometric Identities and Equations

17 .  18 .  19 . 

For the following exercises, find the requested information. 

20 . Given that  and  21 . Given that  and 
 with  and  with  and 

both in the interval both in the interval 
find  and find  and 

For the following exercises, find the exact value of each expression. 

22 .  23 .  24 . 

Graphical 

For the following exercises, simplify the expression, and then graph both expressions as functions to verify the graphs 
are identical. Confirm your answer using a graphing calculator. 
25 . 26 .  27 . 

28 .  29 . 30 . 

31 . 32 . 

For the following exercises, use a graph to determine whether the functions are the same or different. If they are the 
same, show why. If they are different, replace the second function with one that is identical to the first. (Hint: think 

 ) 
33 . 
34 . 
35 .  36 . 

37 .  38 . 

39 . 

40 .  41 . 

Technology 

For the following exercises, find the exact value algebraically, and then confirm the answer with a calculator to the fourth 
decimal point. 
42 .  43 .  44 . 
45 .  46 . 

Extensions 

For the following exercises, prove the identities provided. 

47 .  48 .  49 . 

50 .  51 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



9.3 • Double-Angle, Half-Angle, and Reduction Formulas     827

For the following exercises, prove or disprove the statements. 
52 .  53 . 

54 .  55 . If  and  are angles in the same triangle, then 
prove or disprove 

56 . If  and  are angles in the same 
triangle, then prove or disprove 

9.3 Double-Angle, Half-Angle, and Reduction Formulas 
Learning Objectives 
In this section, you will: 

Use double-angle formulas to find exact values. 
Use double-angle formulas to verify identities. 
Use reduction formulas to simplify an expression. 
Use half-angle formulas to find exact values. 

Figure 1 Bicycle and skateboard ramps for advanced riders have a steeper incline than those designed for novices. 
Bicycle and skateboard ramps made for competition (see Figure 1) must vary in height depending on the skill level of the 
competitors. For advanced competitors, the angle formed by the ramp and the ground should be  such that 
The angle is divided in half for novices. What is the steepness of the ramp for novices? In this section, we will investigate 
three additional categories of identities that we can use to answer questions such as this one. 

Using Double-Angle Formulas to Find Exact Values 
In the previous section, we used addition and subtraction formulas for trigonometric functions. Now, we take another 
look at those same formulas. The double-angle formulas are a special case of the sum formulas, where  Deriving 
the double-angle formula for sine begins with the sum formula, 

If we let  then we have 

Deriving the double-angle for cosine gives us three options. First, starting from the sum formula, 
 and letting  we have 

Using the Pythagorean properties, we can expand this double-angle formula for cosine and get two more variations. The 
first variation is: 



828     9 • Trigonometric Identities and Equations

The second variation is: 

Similarly, to derive the double-angle formula for tangent, replacing  in the sum formula gives 

Double-Angle Formulas 

The double-angle formulas are summarized as follows: 

...
HOW TO 

Given the tangent of an angle and the quadrant in which it is located, use the double-angle formulas to find 
the exact value. 

1. Draw a triangle to reflect the given information. 
2. Determine the correct double-angle formula. 
3. Substitute values into the formula based on the triangle. 
4. Simplify. 

EXAMPLE 1 

Using a Double-Angle Formula to Find the Exact Value Involving Tangent 
Given that  and  is in quadrant II, find the following: 

ⓐ   ⓑ   ⓒ  
Solution 

If we draw a triangle to reflect the information given, we can find the values needed to solve the problems on the image. 
We are given  such that  is in quadrant II. The tangent of an angle is equal to the opposite side over the 
adjacent side, and because  is in the second quadrant, the adjacent side is on the x-axis and is negative. Use the 
Pythagorean Theorem to find the length of the hypotenuse: 

Access for free at openstax.org



9.3 • Double-Angle, Half-Angle, and Reduction Formulas     829

Now we can draw a triangle similar to the one shown in Figure 2. 

Figure 2 

ⓐ  Let’s begin by writing the double-angle formula for sine. 

We see that we to need to find  and  Based on Figure 2, we see that the hypotenuse equals 5, so 
 and  Substitute these values into the equation, and simplify. 

Thus, 

ⓑ  Write the double-angle formula for cosine. 

Again, substitute the values of the sine and cosine into the equation, and simplify. 

ⓒ  Write the double-angle formula for tangent. 

In this formula, we need the tangent, which we were given as  Substitute this value into the equation, 
and simplify. 

 TRY IT #1 Given  with  in quadrant I, find 

EXAMPLE 2 

Using the Double-Angle Formula for Cosine without Exact Values 
Use the double-angle formula for cosine to write  in terms of 



830     9 • Trigonometric Identities and Equations

Solution 

Analysis 
This example illustrates that we can use the double-angle formula without having exact values. It emphasizes that the 
pattern is what we need to remember and that identities are true for all values in the domain of the trigonometric 
function. 

Using Double-Angle Formulas to Verify Identities 
Establishing identities using the double-angle formulas is performed using the same steps we used to derive the sum 
and difference formulas. Choose the more complicated side of the equation and rewrite it until it matches the other side. 

EXAMPLE 3 

Using the Double-Angle Formulas to Verify an Identity 
Verify the following identity using double-angle formulas: 

Solution 
We will work on the right side of the equal sign and rewrite the expression until it matches the left side. 

Analysis 
This process is not complicated, as long as we recall the perfect square formula from algebra: 

where  and  Part of being successful in mathematics is the ability to recognize patterns. While the 
terms or symbols may change, the algebra remains consistent. 

 TRY IT #2 Verify the identity: 

EXAMPLE 4 

Verifying a Double-Angle Identity for Tangent 
Verify the identity: 

Solution 
In this case, we will work with the left side of the equation and simplify or rewrite until it equals the right side of the 
equation. 

Access for free at openstax.org



9.3 • Double-Angle, Half-Angle, and Reduction Formulas     831

Analysis 
Here is a case where the more complicated side of the initial equation appeared on the right, but we chose to work the 
left side. However, if we had chosen the left side to rewrite, we would have been working backwards to arrive at the 
equivalency. For example, suppose that we wanted to show 

Let’s work on the right side. 

When using the identities to simplify a trigonometric expression or solve a trigonometric equation, there are usually 
several paths to a desired result. There is no set rule as to what side should be manipulated. However, we should begin 
with the guidelines set forth earlier. 

 TRY IT #3 Verify the identity: 

Use Reduction Formulas to Simplify an Expression 
The double-angle formulas can be used to derive the reduction formulas, which are formulas we can use to reduce the 
power of a given expression involving even powers of sine or cosine. They allow us to rewrite the even powers of sine or 
cosine in terms of the first power of cosine. These formulas are especially important in higher-level math courses, 
calculus in particular. Also called the power-reducing formulas, three identities are included and are easily derived from 
the double-angle formulas. 
We can use two of the three double-angle formulas for cosine to derive the reduction formulas for sine and cosine. Let’s 
begin with  Solve for 

Next, we use the formula  Solve for 

The last reduction formula is derived by writing tangent in terms of sine and cosine: 



832     9 • Trigonometric Identities and Equations

Reduction Formulas 

The reduction formulas are summarized as follows: 

EXAMPLE 5 

Writing an Equivalent Expression Not Containing Powers Greater Than 1 
Write an equivalent expression for  that does not involve any powers of sine or cosine greater than 1. 

Solution 
We will apply the reduction formula for cosine twice. 

Analysis 
The solution is found by using the reduction formula twice, as noted, and the perfect square formula from algebra. 

EXAMPLE 6 

Using the Power-Reducing Formulas to Prove an Identity 
Use the power-reducing formulas to prove 

Solution 
We will work on simplifying the left side of the equation: 

Access for free at openstax.org



9.3 • Double-Angle, Half-Angle, and Reduction Formulas     833

Analysis 
Note that in this example, we substituted 

for  The formula states 

We let  so 

 TRY IT #4 Use the power-reducing formulas to prove that 

Using Half-Angle Formulas to Find Exact Values 
The next set of identities is the set of half-angle formulas, which can be derived from the reduction formulas and we 
can use when we have an angle that is half the size of a special angle. If we replace  with  the half-angle formula for 
sine is found by simplifying the equation and solving for  Note that the half-angle formulas are preceded by a 
sign. This does not mean that both the positive and negative expressions are valid. Rather, it depends on the quadrant in 
which  terminates. 

The half-angle formula for sine is derived as follows: 

To derive the half-angle formula for cosine, we have 

For the tangent identity, we have 



834     9 • Trigonometric Identities and Equations

Half-Angle Formulas 

The half-angle formulas are as follows: 

EXAMPLE 7 

Using a Half-Angle Formula to Find the Exact Value of a Sine Function 
Find  using a half-angle formula. 

Solution 
Since  we use the half-angle formula for sine: 

Remember that we can check the answer with a graphing calculator. 

Analysis 
Notice that we used only the positive root because  is positive. 

...
HOW TO 

Given the tangent of an angle and the quadrant in which the angle lies, find the exact values of trigonometric 
functions of half of the angle. 

1. Draw a triangle to represent the given information. 
2. Determine the correct half-angle formula. 
3. Substitute values into the formula based on the triangle. 
4. Simplify. 

Access for free at openstax.org



9.3 • Double-Angle, Half-Angle, and Reduction Formulas     835

EXAMPLE 8 

Finding Exact Values Using Half-Angle Identities 
Given that  and  lies in quadrant III, find the exact value of the following: 

ⓐ   ⓑ   ⓒ  
Solution 

Using the given information, we can draw the triangle shown in Figure 3. Using the Pythagorean Theorem, we find the 
hypotenuse to be 17. Therefore, we can calculate  and 

Figure 3 

ⓐ  Before we start, we must remember that if  is in quadrant III, then  so  This 
means that the terminal side of  is in quadrant II, since 
To find  we begin by writing the half-angle formula for sine. Then we substitute the value of the cosine we 
found from the triangle in Figure 3 and simplify. 

We choose the positive value of  because the angle terminates in quadrant II and sine is positive in quadrant II. 



836     9 • Trigonometric Identities and Equations

ⓑ  To find  we will write the half-angle formula for cosine, substitute the value of the cosine we found from 
the triangle in Figure 3, and simplify. 

We choose the negative value of  because the angle is in quadrant II because cosine is negative in quadrant II. 

ⓒ  To find  we write the half-angle formula for tangent. Again, we substitute the value of the cosine we found 
from the triangle in Figure 3 and simplify. 

We choose the negative value of  because  lies in quadrant II, and tangent is negative in quadrant II. 

 TRY IT #5 Given that  and  lies in quadrant IV, find the exact value of 

EXAMPLE 9 

Finding the Measurement of a Half Angle 
Now, we will return to the problem posed at the beginning of the section. A bicycle ramp is constructed for high-level 
competition with an angle of  formed by the ramp and the ground. Another ramp is to be constructed half as steep for 
novice competition. If  for higher-level competition, what is the measurement of the angle for novice 
competition? 

Solution 
Since the angle for novice competition measures half the steepness of the angle for the high level competition, and 

 for high competition, we can find  from the right triangle and the Pythagorean theorem so that we can 
use the half-angle identities. See Figure 4. 

Access for free at openstax.org



9.3 • Double-Angle, Half-Angle, and Reduction Formulas     837

Figure 4 

We see that  We can use the half-angle formula for tangent:  Since  is in 

the first quadrant, so is 

We can take the inverse tangent to find the angle:  So the angle of the ramp for novice competition 
is 

 MEDIA 

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with double-angle, half-angle, and reduction 
formulas. 

Double-Angle Identities (https://openstax.org/l/doubleangiden) 
Half-Angle Identities (https://openstax.org/l/halfangleident) 

 9.3 SECTION EXERCISES 
Verbal 

1 . Explain how to determine the reduction identities  2 . Explain how to determine the double-angle 
from the double-angle identity formula for  using the double-angle 

formulas for  and 

3 . We can determine the half-angle formula for  4 . For the half-angle formula given in the previous 
 by dividing the formula for exercise for  explain why dividing by 0 is 

not a concern. (Hint: examine the values of 
 by  Explain how to determine two necessary for the denominator to be 0.) 

formulas for  that do not involve any square 
roots. 



838     9 • Trigonometric Identities and Equations

Algebraic 

For the following exercises, find the exact values of a)  b)  and c)  without solving for 

5 . If  and  is in quadrant I.  6 . If  and  is in quadrant I. 

7 . If  and    is in quadrant III.  8 . If  and  is in quadrant IV. 

For the following exercises, find the values of the six trigonometric functions if the conditions provided hold. 

9 .  and  10 .  and 

For the following exercises, simplify to one trigonometric expression. 
11 .  12 . 

For the following exercises, find the exact value using half-angle formulas. 

13 .  14 .  15 . 

16 .  17 .  18 . 

19 . 

For the following exercises, find the exact values of a)  b)  and c)  without solving for  when 

20 . If  and  is in  21 . If  and  is in  22 . If  and      is 
quadrant IV. quadrant III. in quadrant II. 

23 . If  and  is in 
quadrant II. 

For the following exercises, use Figure 5 to find the requested half and double angles. 

Figure 5 
24 . Find  and  25 . Find  and 

26 . Find  and 27 . Find  and 

For the following exercises, simplify each expression. Do not evaluate. 

28 .  29 .  30 . 

31 .  32 .  33 . 

For the following exercises, prove the given identity. 

34 .  35 .  36 . 

37 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



9.4 • Sum-to-Product and Product-to-Sum Formulas     839

For the following exercises, rewrite the expression with an exponent no higher than 1. 

38 .  39 .  40 . 

41 .  42 .  43 . 

44 . 

Technology 

For the following exercises, reduce the equations to powers of one, and then check the answer graphically. 

45 .  46 .  47 . 

48 .  49 .  50 . 

51 .  52 . 

For the following exercises, algebraically find an equivalent function, only in terms of  and/or  and then check 
the answer by graphing both functions. 
53 .  54 . 

Extensions 

For the following exercises, prove the identities. 

55 .  56 .  57 . 

58 .  59 . 

60 .  61 . 

62 . 

63 . 

9.4 Sum-to-Product and Product-to-Sum Formulas 
Learning Objectives 
In this section, you will: 

Express products as sums. 
Express sums as products. 



840     9 • Trigonometric Identities and Equations

Figure 1 The UCLA marching band (credit: Eric Chan, Flickr). 
A band marches down the field creating an amazing sound that bolsters the crowd. That sound travels as a wave that 
can be interpreted using trigonometric functions. For example, Figure 2 represents a sound wave for the musical note A. 
In this section, we will investigate trigonometric identities that are the foundation of everyday phenomena such as 
sound waves. 

Figure 2 

Expressing Products as Sums 
We have already learned a number of formulas useful for expanding or simplifying trigonometric expressions, but 
sometimes we may need to express the product of cosine and sine as a sum. We can use the product-to-sum formulas, 
which express products of trigonometric functions as sums. Let’s investigate the cosine identity first and then the sine 
identity. 

Expressing Products as Sums for Cosine 
We can derive the product-to-sum formula from the sum and difference identities for cosine. If we add the two 
equations, we get: 

Then, we divide by  to isolate the product of cosines: 

...
HOW TO 

Given a product of cosines, express as a sum. 

1. Write the formula for the product of cosines. 

Access for free at openstax.org



9.4 • Sum-to-Product and Product-to-Sum Formulas     841

2. Substitute the given angles into the formula. 
3. Simplify. 

EXAMPLE 1 

Writing the Product as a Sum Using the Product-to-Sum Formula for Cosine 
Write the following product of cosines as a sum: 

Solution 
We begin by writing the formula for the product of cosines: 

We can then substitute the given angles into the formula and simplify. 

 TRY IT #1 Use the product-to-sum formula to write the product as a sum or difference: 

Expressing the Product of Sine and Cosine as a Sum 
Next, we will derive the product-to-sum formula for sine and cosine from the sum and difference formulas for sine. If we 
add the sum and difference identities, we get: 

Then, we divide by 2 to isolate the product of cosine and sine: 

EXAMPLE 2 

Writing the Product as a Sum Containing only Sine or Cosine 
Express the following product as a sum containing only sine or cosine and no products: 

Solution 
Write the formula for the product of sine and cosine. Then substitute the given values into the formula and simplify. 

 TRY IT #2 Use the product-to-sum formula to write the product as a sum: 

Expressing Products of Sines in Terms of Cosine 
Expressing the product of sines in terms of cosine is also derived from the sum and difference identities for cosine. In 
this case, we will first subtract the two cosine formulas: 



842     9 • Trigonometric Identities and Equations

Then, we divide by 2 to isolate the product of sines: 

Similarly we could express the product of cosines in terms of sine or derive other product-to-sum formulas. 

The Product-to-Sum Formulas 

The product-to-sum formulas are as follows: 

EXAMPLE 3 

Express the Product as a Sum or Difference 
Write  as a sum or difference. 

Solution 
We have the product of cosines, so we begin by writing the related formula. Then we substitute the given angles and 
simplify. 

 TRY IT #3 Use the product-to-sum formula to evaluate 

Expressing Sums as Products 
Some problems require the reverse of the process we just used. The sum-to-product formulas allow us to express sums 
of sine or cosine as products. These formulas can be derived from the product-to-sum identities. For example, with a few 
substitutions, we can derive the sum-to-product identity for sine. Let  and 

Then, 

Thus, replacing  and  in the product-to-sum formula with the substitute expressions, we have 

Access for free at openstax.org



9.4 • Sum-to-Product and Product-to-Sum Formulas     843

The other sum-to-product identities are derived similarly. 

Sum-to-Product Formulas 

The sum-to-product formulas are as follows: 

EXAMPLE 4 

Writing the Difference of Sines as a Product 
Write the following difference of sines expression as a product: 

Solution 
We begin by writing the formula for the difference of sines. 

Substitute the values into the formula, and simplify. 

 TRY IT #4 Use the sum-to-product formula to write the sum as a product: 

EXAMPLE 5 

Evaluating Using the Sum-to-Product Formula 
Evaluate  Check the answer with a graphing calculator. 

Solution 
We begin by writing the formula for the difference of cosines. 

Then we substitute the given angles and simplify. 



844     9 • Trigonometric Identities and Equations

EXAMPLE 6 

Proving an Identity 
Prove the identity: 

Solution 
We will start with the left side, the more complicated side of the equation, and rewrite the expression until it matches the 
right side. 

Analysis 

Recall that verifying trigonometric identities has its own set of rules. The procedures for solving an equation are not the 
same as the procedures for verifying an identity. When we prove an identity, we pick one side to work on and make 
substitutions until that side is transformed into the other side. 

EXAMPLE 7 

Verifying the Identity Using Double-Angle Formulas and Reciprocal Identities 
Verify the identity 

Solution 
For verifying this equation, we are bringing together several of the identities. We will use the double-angle formula and 
the reciprocal identities. We will work with the right side of the equation and rewrite it until it matches the left side. 

 TRY IT #5 Verify the identity 

 MEDIA 

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with the product-to-sum and sum-to-product 

Access for free at openstax.org



9.4 • Sum-to-Product and Product-to-Sum Formulas     845

identities. 

Sum to Product Identities (https://openstax.org/l/sumtoprod) 
Sum to Product and Product to Sum Identities (https://openstax.org/l/sumtpptsum) 

 9.4 SECTION EXERCISES 
Verbal 

1 . Starting with the product to sum formula  2 . Provide two different methods of calculating 
 explain  one of which uses the product 

how to determine the formula for to sum. Which method is easier? 

3 . Describe a situation where we would convert an  4 . Describe a situation where we would convert an 
equation from a sum to a product and give an equation from a product to a sum, and give an 
example. example. 

Algebraic 

For the following exercises, rewrite the product as a sum or difference. 
5 .  6 .  7 . 
8 .  9 .  10 . 

For the following exercises, rewrite the sum or difference as a product. 
11 .  12 .  13 . 
14 .  15 .  16 . 

For the following exercises, evaluate the product for the following using a sum or difference of two functions. Evaluate 
exactly. 
17 .  18 .  19 . 
20 .  21 . 

For the following exercises, evaluate the product using a sum or difference of two functions. Leave in terms of sine and 
cosine. 
22 .  23 .  24 . 
25 .  26 . 

For the following exercises, rewrite the sum as a product of two functions. Leave in terms of sine and cosine. 
27 .  28 .  29 . 
30 .  31 . 

For the following exercises, prove the identity. 

32 .  33 . 

34 .  35 . 

36 .  37 . 

38 . 



846     9 • Trigonometric Identities and Equations

Numeric 

For the following exercises, rewrite the sum as a product of two functions or the product as a sum of two functions. Give 
your answer in terms of sines and cosines. Then evaluate the final answer numerically, rounded to four decimal places. 
39 .  40 .  41 . 
42 .  43 . 

Technology 

For the following exercises, algebraically determine whether each of the given equation is an identity. If it is not an 
identity, replace the right-hand side with an expression equivalent to the left side. Verify the results by graphing both 
expressions on a calculator. 

44 .  45 . 

46 .  47 . 

48 . 

For the following exercises, simplify the expression to one term, then graph the original function and your simplified 
version to verify they are identical. 

49 .  50 . 

51 .  52 . 

53 . 

Extensions 

For the following exercises, prove the following sum-to-product formulas. 

54 .  55 . 

For the following exercises, prove the identity. 

56 .  57 . 

58 . 59 . 

60 .  61 . 

62 . 

63 . 

9.5 Solving Trigonometric Equations 
Learning Objectives 
In this section, you will: 

Solve linear trigonometric equations in sine and cosine. 
Solve equations involving a single trigonometric function. 
Solve trigonometric equations using a calculator. 
Solve trigonometric equations that are quadratic in form. 
Solve trigonometric equations using fundamental identities. 
Solve trigonometric equations with multiple angles. 
Solve right triangle problems. 

Access for free at openstax.org



9.5 • Solving Trigonometric Equations     847

Figure 1 Egyptian pyramids standing near a modern city. (credit: Oisin Mulvihill) 
Thales of Miletus (circa 625–547 BC) is known as the founder of geometry. The legend is that he calculated the height of 
the Great Pyramid of Giza in Egypt using the theory of similar triangles, which he developed by measuring the shadow of 
his staff. He reasoned that when the height of his staff's shadow was exactly equal to the actual height of the staff, then 
the height of the nearby pyramid's shadow must also be equal to the height of the actual pyramid. Since the structures 
and their shadows were creating a right triangle with two equal sides, they were similar triangles. By measuring the 
length of the pyramid's shadow at that moment, he could obtain the height of the pyramid. Based on proportions, this 
theory has applications in a number of areas, including fractal geometry, engineering, and architecture. Often, the angle 
of elevation and the angle of depression are found using similar triangles. 
In earlier sections of this chapter, we looked at trigonometric identities. Identities are true for all values in the domain of 
the variable. In this section, we begin our study of trigonometric equations to study real-world scenarios such as the 
finding the dimensions of the pyramids. 

Solving Linear Trigonometric Equations in Sine and Cosine 
Trigonometric equations are, as the name implies, equations that involve trigonometric functions. Similar in many ways 
to solving polynomial equations or rational equations, only specific values of the variable will be solutions, if there are 
solutions at all. Often we will solve a trigonometric equation over a specified interval. However, just as often, we will be 
asked to find all possible solutions, and as trigonometric functions are periodic, solutions are repeated within each 
period. In other words, trigonometric equations may have an infinite number of solutions. Additionally, like rational 
equations, the domain of the function must be considered before we assume that any solution is valid. The period of 
both the sine function and the cosine function is  In other words, every  units, the y-values repeat. If we need to 
find all possible solutions, then we must add  where  is an integer, to the initial solution. Recall the rule that gives 
the format for stating all possible solutions for a function where the period is 

There are similar rules for indicating all possible solutions for the other trigonometric functions. Solving trigonometric 
equations requires the same techniques as solving algebraic equations. We read the equation from left to right, 
horizontally, like a sentence. We look for known patterns, factor, find common denominators, and substitute certain 
expressions with a variable to make solving a more straightforward process. However, with trigonometric equations, we 
also have the advantage of using the identities we developed in the previous sections. 

EXAMPLE 1 

Solving a Linear Trigonometric Equation Involving the Cosine Function 
Find all possible exact solutions for the equation 

Solution 
From the unit circle, we know that 

These are the solutions in the interval  All possible solutions are given by 



848     9 • Trigonometric Identities and Equations

where  is an integer. 

EXAMPLE 2 

Solving a Linear Equation Involving the Sine Function 
Find all possible exact solutions for the equation 

Solution 
Solving for all possible values of t means that solutions include angles beyond the period of  From Figure 2, we can 
see that the solutions are  and  But the problem is asking for all possible values that solve the equation. 
Therefore, the answer is 

where  is an integer. 

...
HOW TO 

Given a trigonometric equation, solve using algebra. 

1. Look for a pattern that suggests an algebraic property, such as the difference of squares or a factoring 
opportunity. 

2. Substitute the trigonometric expression with a single variable, such as  or 
3. Solve the equation the same way an algebraic equation would be solved. 
4. Substitute the trigonometric expression back in for the variable in the resulting expressions. 
5. Solve for the angle. 

EXAMPLE 3 

Solve the Linear Trigonometric Equation 
Solve the equation exactly: 

Solution 
Use algebraic techniques to solve the equation. 

 TRY IT #1 Solve exactly the following linear equation on the interval 

Solving Equations Involving a Single Trigonometric Function 
When we are given equations that involve only one of the six trigonometric functions, their solutions involve using 
algebraic techniques and the unit circle (see Figure 2). We need to make several considerations when the equation 
involves trigonometric functions other than sine and cosine. Problems involving the reciprocals of the primary 
trigonometric functions need to be viewed from an algebraic perspective. In other words, we will write the reciprocal 
function, and solve for the angles using the function. Also, an equation involving the tangent function is slightly different 
from one containing a sine or cosine function. First, as we know, the period of tangent is  not  Further, the domain 

Access for free at openstax.org



9.5 • Solving Trigonometric Equations     849

of tangent is all real numbers with the exception of odd integer multiples of  unless, of course, a problem places its 
own restrictions on the domain. 

EXAMPLE 4 

Solving a Problem Involving a Single Trigonometric Function 
Solve the problem exactly: 

Solution 
As this problem is not easily factored, we will solve using the square root property. First, we use algebra to isolate 
Then we will find the angles. 

EXAMPLE 5 

Solving a Trigonometric Equation Involving Cosecant 
Solve the following equation exactly: 

Solution 
We want all values of  for which  over the interval 

Analysis 
As  notice that all four solutions are in the third and fourth quadrants. 

EXAMPLE 6 

Solving an Equation Involving Tangent 
Solve the equation exactly: 

Solution 
Recall that the tangent function has a period of  On the interval  and at the angle of  the tangent has a value 
of 1. However, the angle we want is  Thus, if  then 

Over the interval  we have two solutions: 



850     9 • Trigonometric Identities and Equations

 TRY IT #2 Find all solutions for 

EXAMPLE 7 

Identify all Solutions to the Equation Involving Tangent 
Identify all exact solutions to the equation 

Solution 
We can solve this equation using only algebra. Isolate the expression  on the left side of the equals sign. 

There are two angles on the unit circle that have a tangent value of  and 

Solve Trigonometric Equations Using a Calculator 
Not all functions can be solved exactly using only the unit circle. When we must solve an equation involving an angle 
other than one of the special angles, we will need to use a calculator. Make sure it is set to the proper mode, either 
degrees or radians, depending on the criteria of the given problem. 

EXAMPLE 8 

Using a Calculator to Solve a Trigonometric Equation Involving Sine 
Use a calculator to solve the equation  where  is in radians. 

Solution 
Make sure mode is set to radians. To find  use the inverse sine function. On most calculators, you will need to push the 
2ND button and then the SIN button to bring up the  function. What is shown on the screen is  The 
calculator is ready for the input within the parentheses. For this problem, we enter  and press ENTER. Thus, 
to four decimals places, 

The solution is 

The angle measurement in degrees is 

Analysis 
Note that a calculator will only return an angle in quadrants I or IV for the sine function, since that is the range of the 
inverse sine. The other angle is obtained by using  Thus, the additional solution is 

EXAMPLE 9 

Using a Calculator to Solve a Trigonometric Equation Involving Secant 
Use a calculator to solve the equation  giving your answer in radians. 

Solution 
We can begin with some algebra. 

Access for free at openstax.org



9.5 • Solving Trigonometric Equations     851

Check that the MODE is in radians. Now use the inverse cosine function. 

Since  and  1.8235 is between these two numbers, thus  is in quadrant II. Cosine is also 
negative in quadrant III. Note that a calculator will only return an angle in quadrants I or II for the cosine function, since 
that is the range of the inverse cosine. See Figure 2. 

Figure 2 
So, we also need to find the measure of the angle in quadrant III. In quadrant II, the reference angle is 
​ ​  The other solution in quadrant III is ​ ​

The solutions are  and 

 TRY IT #3 Solve 

Solving Trigonometric Equations in Quadratic Form 
Solving a quadratic equation may be more complicated, but once again, we can use algebra as we would for any 
quadratic equation. Look at the pattern of the equation. Is there more than one trigonometric function in the equation, 
or is there only one? Which trigonometric function is squared? If there is only one function represented and one of the 
terms is squared, think about the standard form of a quadratic. Replace the trigonometric function with a variable such 
as  or  If substitution makes the equation look like a quadratic equation, then we can use the same methods for 
solving quadratics to solve the trigonometric equations. 

EXAMPLE 10 

Solving a Trigonometric Equation in Quadratic Form 
Solve the equation exactly: 

Solution 
We begin by using substitution and replacing cos  with  It is not necessary to use substitution, but it may make the 
problem easier to solve visually. Let  We have 



852     9 • Trigonometric Identities and Equations

The equation cannot be factored, so we will use the quadratic formula 

Replace  with  and solve. 

Note that only the + sign is used. This is because we get an error when we solve  on a calculator, 

since the domain of the inverse cosine function is  However, there is a second solution: 

This terminal side of the angle lies in quadrant I. Since cosine is also positive in quadrant IV, the second solution is 

EXAMPLE 11 

Solving a Trigonometric Equation in Quadratic Form by Factoring 
Solve the equation exactly: 

Solution 
Using grouping, this quadratic can be factored. Either make the real substitution,  or imagine it, as we factor: 

Now set each factor equal to zero. 

Next solve for  as the range of the sine function is  However,  giving the solution 

Analysis 
Make sure to check all solutions on the given domain as some factors have no solution. 

 TRY IT #4 Solve  [Hint: Make a substitution to express the equation only in 
terms of cosine.] 

Access for free at openstax.org



9.5 • Solving Trigonometric Equations     853

EXAMPLE 12 

Solving a Trigonometric Equation Using Algebra 
Solve exactly: 

Solution 
This problem should appear familiar as it is similar to a quadratic. Let  The equation becomes 
We begin by factoring: 

Set each factor equal to zero. 

Then, substitute back into the equation the original expression  for  Thus, 

The solutions within the domain  are 

If we prefer not to substitute, we can solve the equation by following the same pattern of factoring and setting each 
factor equal to zero. 

Analysis 
We can see the solutions on the graph in Figure 3. On the interval  the graph crosses the x-axis four times, at 
the solutions noted. Notice that trigonometric equations that are in quadratic form can yield up to four solutions instead 
of the expected two that are found with quadratic equations. In this example, each solution (angle) corresponding to a 
positive sine value will yield two angles that would result in that value. 



854     9 • Trigonometric Identities and Equations

Figure 3 
We can verify the solutions on the unit circle in Figure 2 as well. 

EXAMPLE 13 

Solving a Trigonometric Equation Quadratic in Form 
Solve the equation quadratic in form exactly: 

Solution 
We can factor using grouping. Solution values of  can be found on the unit circle. 

 TRY IT #5 Solve the quadratic equation 

Solving Trigonometric Equations Using Fundamental Identities 
While algebra can be used to solve a number of trigonometric equations, we can also use the fundamental identities 
because they make solving equations simpler. Remember that the techniques we use for solving are not the same as 
those for verifying identities. The basic rules of algebra apply here, as opposed to rewriting one side of the identity to 
match the other side. In the next example, we use two identities to simplify the equation. 

EXAMPLE 14 

Use Identities to Solve an Equation 
Use identities to solve exactly the trigonometric equation over the interval 

Solution 
Notice that the left side of the equation is the difference formula for cosine. 

Access for free at openstax.org



9.5 • Solving Trigonometric Equations     855

From the unit circle in Figure 2, we see that  when 

EXAMPLE 15 

Solving the Equation Using a Double-Angle Formula 
Solve the equation exactly using a double-angle formula: 

Solution 
We have three choices of expressions to substitute for the double-angle of cosine. As it is simpler to solve for one 
trigonometric function at a time, we will choose the double-angle identity involving only cosine: 

So, if  then  and  if  then 

EXAMPLE 16 

Solving an Equation Using an Identity 
Solve the equation exactly using an identity: 

Solution 
If we rewrite the right side, we can write the equation in terms of cosine: 



856     9 • Trigonometric Identities and Equations

Our solutions are 

Solving Trigonometric Equations with Multiple Angles 
Sometimes it is not possible to solve a trigonometric equation with identities that have a multiple angle, such as 
or  When confronted with these equations, recall that  is a horizontal compression by a factor of 2 of 
the function  On an interval of  we can graph two periods of  as opposed to one cycle of 

 This compression of the graph leads us to believe there may be twice as many x-intercepts or solutions to 
 compared to  This information will help us solve the equation. 

EXAMPLE 17 

Solving a Multiple Angle Trigonometric Equation 
Solve exactly:  on 

Solution 
We can see that this equation is the standard equation with a multiple of an angle. If  we know  is in 
quadrants I and IV. While  will only yield solutions in quadrants I and II, we recognize that the solutions to 
the equation  will be in quadrants I and IV. 

Therefore, the possible angles are  and  So,  or  which means that  or  Does 
this make sense? Yes, because 

Are there any other possible answers? Let us return to our first step. 
In quadrant I,  so  as noted. Let us revolve around the circle again: 

so 

One more rotation yields 

 so this value for  is larger than  so it is not a solution on 

In quadrant IV,  so  as noted. Let us revolve around the circle again: 

so 

One more rotation yields 

 so this value for  is larger than  so it is not a solution on 

Access for free at openstax.org



9.5 • Solving Trigonometric Equations     857

Our solutions are . Note that whenever we solve a problem in the form of  we must 
go around the unit circle  times. 

Solving Right Triangle Problems 
We can now use all of the methods we have learned to solve problems that involve applying the properties of right 
triangles and the Pythagorean Theorem. We begin with the familiar Pythagorean Theorem,  and model an 
equation to fit a situation. 

EXAMPLE 18 

Using the Pythagorean Theorem to Model an Equation 
Use the Pythagorean Theorem, and the properties of right triangles to model an equation that fits the problem. 
One of the cables that anchors the center of the London Eye Ferris wheel to the ground must be replaced. The center of 
the Ferris wheel is 69.5 meters above the ground, and the second anchor on the ground is 23 meters from the base of 
the Ferris wheel. Approximately how long is the cable, and what is the angle of elevation (from ground up to the center 
of the Ferris wheel)? See Figure 4. 

Figure 4 

Solution 
Using the information given, we can draw a right triangle. We can find the length of the cable with the Pythagorean 
Theorem. 

The angle of elevation is  formed by the second anchor on the ground and the cable reaching to the center of the 
wheel. We can use the tangent function to find its measure. Round to two decimal places. 

The angle of elevation is approximately  and the length of the cable is 73.2 meters. 

EXAMPLE 19 

Using the Pythagorean Theorem to Model an Abstract Problem 
OSHA safety regulations require that the base of a ladder be placed 1 foot from the wall for every 4 feet of ladder length. 



858     9 • Trigonometric Identities and Equations

Find the angle that a ladder of any length forms with the ground and the height at which the ladder touches the wall. 

Solution 
For any length of ladder, the base needs to be a distance from the wall equal to one fourth of the ladder’s length. 
Equivalently, if the base of the ladder is “a” feet from the wall, the length of the ladder will be 4a feet. See Figure 5. 

Figure 5 
The side adjacent to  is a and the hypotenuse is  Thus, 

The elevation of the ladder forms an angle of  with the ground. The height at which the ladder touches the wall can 
be found using the Pythagorean Theorem: 

Thus, the ladder touches the wall at  feet from the ground. 

 MEDIA 

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with solving trigonometric equations. 

Solving Trigonometric Equations I (https://openstax.org/l/solvetrigeqI) 
Solving Trigonometric Equations II (https://openstax.org/l/solvetrigeqII) 
Solving Trigonometric Equations III (https://openstax.org/l/solvetrigeqIII) 
Solving Trigonometric Equations IV (https://openstax.org/l/solvetrigeqIV) 
Solving Trigonometric Equations V (https://openstax.org/l/solvetrigeqV) 
Solving Trigonometric Equations VI (https://openstax.org/l/solvetrigeqVI) 

 9.5 SECTION EXERCISES 
Verbal 

1 . Will there always be  2 . When solving a  3 . When solving linear trig 
solutions to trigonometric trigonometric equation equations in terms of only 
function equations? If not, involving more than one trig sine or cosine, how do we 
describe an equation that function, do we always want know whether there will be 
would not have a solution. to try to rewrite the solutions? 
Explain why or why not. equation so it is expressed 

in terms of one 
trigonometric function? Why 
or why not? 

Access for free at openstax.org



9.5 • Solving Trigonometric Equations     859

Algebraic 

For the following exercises, find all solutions exactly on the interval 

4 .  5 .  6 . 

7 .  8 .  9 . 

10 .  11 .  12 . 

For the following exercises, solve exactly on 

13 .  14 .  15 . 

16 .  17 .  18 . 

19 .  20 .  21 . 

22 . 

For the following exercises, find all exact solutions on 

23 .  24 .  25 . 

26 .  27 . 

28 .  29 .  30 . 

31 .  32 . 

For the following exercises, solve with the methods shown in this section exactly on the interval 
33 .  34 . 
35 .  36 . 

37 .  38 .  39 . 
40 . 

For the following exercises, solve exactly on the interval  Use the quadratic formula if the equations do not factor. 

41 .  42 .  43 . 

44 .  45 .  46 . 

47 .  48 .  49 . 

For the following exercises, find exact solutions on the interval  Look for opportunities to use trigonometric 
identities. 

50 .  51 .  52 . 

53 .  54 .  55 . 

56 .  57 .  58 . 

59 .  60 .  61 . 

62 .  63 .  64 . 

65 . 



860     9 • Trigonometric Identities and Equations

Graphical 

For the following exercises, algebraically determine all solutions of the trigonometric equation exactly, then verify the 
results by graphing the equation and finding the zeros. Use an interval of 

66 .  67 .  68 . 

69 .  70 . 

71 .  72 . 

Technology 

For the following exercises, use a calculator to find all solutions to four decimal places. 
73 .  74 .  75 . 
76 . 

For the following exercises, solve the equations algebraically, and then use a calculator to find the values on the interval 
 Round to four decimal places. 

77 .  78 .  79 . 

80 .  81 .  82 . 

Extensions 

For the following exercises, find all solutions exactly to the equations on the interval 

83 .  84 . 

85 .  86 . 

87 .  88 . 

89 .  90 . 

91 .  92 . 

Real-World Applications 

93 . An airplane has only  94 . If a loading ramp is placed  95 . If a loading ramp is placed 
enough gas to fly to a city next to a truck, at a height next to a truck, at a height 
200 miles northeast of its of 4 feet, and the ramp is of 2 feet, and the ramp is 
current location. If the pilot 15 feet long, what angle 20 feet long, what angle 
knows that the city is 25 does the ramp make with does the ramp make with 
miles north, how many the ground? the ground? 
degrees north of east 
should the airplane fly? 

96 . A woman is watching a  97 . An astronaut is in a  98 . A woman is standing 8 
launched rocket currently launched rocket currently meters away from a 
11 miles in altitude. If she 15 miles in altitude. If a 10-meter tall building. At 
is standing 4 miles from man is standing 2 miles what angle is she looking 
the launch pad, at what from the launch pad, at to the top of the building? 
angle is she looking up what angle is the astronaut 
from horizontal? looking down at him from 

horizontal? (Hint: this is 
called the angle of 
depression.) 

Access for free at openstax.org



9.5 • Solving Trigonometric Equations     861

99 . Issa is standing 10 meters  100 . A 20-foot tall building has  101 . A 90-foot tall building has 
away from a 6-meter tall a shadow that is 55 feet a shadow that is 2 feet 
building. Travis is at the top long. What is the angle of long. What is the angle of 
of the building looking elevation of the sun? elevation of the sun? 
down at Issa. At what angle 
is Travis looking at Issa? 

102. A spotlight on the ground  103 . A spotlight on the ground 
3 meters from a 2-meter 3 feet from a 5-foot tall 
tall man casts a 6 meter woman casts a 15-foot tall 
shadow on a wall 6 shadow on a wall 6 feet 
meters from the man. At from the woman. At what 
what angle is the light? angle is the light? 

For the following exercises, find a solution to the following word problem algebraically. Then use a calculator to verify the 
result. Round the answer to the nearest tenth of a degree. 
104. A person does a  105 . A person does a  106 . A 23-foot ladder is 

handstand with their feet handstand with her feet positioned next to a 
touching a wall and their touching a wall and her house. If the ladder slips 
hands 1.5 feet away from hands 3 feet away from at 7 feet from the house 
the wall. If the person is 6 the wall. If the person is 5 when there is not enough 
feet tall, what angle do feet tall, what angle do traction, what angle 
their feet make with the her feet make with the should the ladder make 
wall? wall? with the ground to avoid 

slipping? 



862     9 • Chapter Review

Chapter Review 
Key Terms 
double-angle formulas  identities derived from the sum formulas for sine, cosine, and tangent in which the angles are 

equal 
even-odd identities  set of equations involving trigonometric functions such that if  the identity is 

odd, and if  the identity is even 
half-angle formulas  identities derived from the reduction formulas and used to determine half-angle values of 

trigonometric functions 
product-to-sum formula  a trigonometric identity that allows the writing of a product of trigonometric functions as a 

sum or difference of trigonometric functions 
Pythagorean identities  set of equations involving trigonometric functions based on the right triangle properties 
quotient identities  pair of identities based on the fact that tangent is the ratio of sine and cosine, and cotangent is the 

ratio of cosine and sine 
reciprocal identities  set of equations involving the reciprocals of basic trigonometric definitions 
reduction formulas  identities derived from the double-angle formulas and used to reduce the power of a 

trigonometric function 
sum-to-product formula  a trigonometric identity that allows, by using substitution, the writing of a sum of 

trigonometric functions as a product of trigonometric functions 

Key Equations 

Pythagorean identities 

Even-odd identities 

Reciprocal identities 

Quotient identities 

Sum Formula for Cosine 

Difference Formula for Cosine 

Sum Formula for Sine 

Difference Formula for Sine 

Access for free at openstax.org



9 • Chapter Review     863

Sum Formula for Tangent 

Difference Formula for Tangent 

Cofunction identities 

Double-angle formulas 

Reduction formulas 

Half-angle formulas 

Product-to-sum Formulas 

Sum-to-product Formulas 



864     9 • Chapter Review

Key Concepts 
9.1 Verifying Trigonometric Identities and Using Trigonometric Identities to Simplify 
Trigonometric Expressions 

• There are multiple ways to represent a trigonometric expression. Verifying the identities illustrates how expressions 
can be rewritten to simplify a problem. 

• Graphing both sides of an identity will verify it. See Example 1. 
• Simplifying one side of the equation to equal the other side is another method for verifying an identity. See Example 

2 and Example 3. 
• The approach to verifying an identity depends on the nature of the identity. It is often useful to begin on the more 

complex side of the equation. See Example 4. 
• We can create an identity and then verify it. See Example 5. 
• Verifying an identity may involve algebra with the fundamental identities. See Example 6 and Example 7. 
• Algebraic techniques can be used to simplify trigonometric expressions. We use algebraic techniques throughout 

this text, as they consist of the fundamental rules of mathematics. See Example 8, Example 9, and Example 10. 

9.2 Sum and Difference Identities 
• The sum formula for cosines states that the cosine of the sum of two angles equals the product of the cosines of the 

angles minus the product of the sines of the angles. The difference formula for cosines states that the cosine of the 
difference of two angles equals the product of the cosines of the angles plus the product of the sines of the angles. 

• The sum and difference formulas can be used to find the exact values of the sine, cosine, or tangent of an angle. See 
Example 1 and Example 2. 

• The sum formula for sines states that the sine of the sum of two angles equals the product of the sine of the first 
angle and cosine of the second angle plus the product of the cosine of the first angle and the sine of the second 
angle. The difference formula for sines states that the sine of the difference of two angles equals the product of the 
sine of the first angle and cosine of the second angle minus the product of the cosine of the first angle and the sine 
of the second angle. See Example 3. 

• The sum and difference formulas for sine and cosine can also be used for inverse trigonometric functions. See 
Example 4. 

• The sum formula for tangent states that the tangent of the sum of two angles equals the sum of the tangents of the 
angles divided by 1 minus the product of the tangents of the angles. The difference formula for tangent states that 
the tangent of the difference of two angles equals the difference of the tangents of the angles divided by 1 plus the 
product of the tangents of the angles. See Example 5. 

• The Pythagorean Theorem along with the sum and difference formulas can be used to find multiple sums and 
differences of angles. See Example 6. 

• The cofunction identities apply to complementary angles and pairs of reciprocal functions. See Example 7. 
• Sum and difference formulas are useful in verifying identities. See Example 8 and Example 9. 
• Application problems are often easier to solve by using sum and difference formulas. See Example 10 and Example 

11. 

9.3 Double-Angle, Half-Angle, and Reduction Formulas 
• Double-angle identities are derived from the sum formulas of the fundamental trigonometric functions: sine, 

cosine, and tangent. See Example 1, Example 2, Example 3, and Example 4. 
• Reduction formulas are especially useful in calculus, as they allow us to reduce the power of the trigonometric term. 

See Example 5 and Example 6. 
• Half-angle formulas allow us to find the value of trigonometric functions involving half-angles, whether the original 

angle is known or not. See Example 7, Example 8, and Example 9. 

9.4 Sum-to-Product and Product-to-Sum Formulas 
• From the sum and difference identities, we can derive the product-to-sum formulas and the sum-to-product 

formulas for sine and cosine. 
• We can use the product-to-sum formulas to rewrite products of sines, products of cosines, and products of sine and 

cosine as sums or differences of sines and cosines. See Example 1, Example 2, and Example 3. 
• We can also derive the sum-to-product identities from the product-to-sum identities using substitution. 
• We can use the sum-to-product formulas to rewrite sum or difference of sines, cosines, or products sine and cosine 

as products of sines and cosines. See Example 4. 
• Trigonometric expressions are often simpler to evaluate using the formulas. See Example 5. 
• The identities can be verified using other formulas or by converting the expressions to sines and cosines. To verify 

Access for free at openstax.org



9 • Exercises     865

an identity, we choose the more complicated side of the equals sign and rewrite it until it is transformed into the 
other side. See Example 6 and Example 7. 

9.5 Solving Trigonometric Equations 
• When solving linear trigonometric equations, we can use algebraic techniques just as we do solving algebraic 

equations. Look for patterns, like the difference of squares, quadratic form, or an expression that lends itself well to 
substitution. See Example 1, Example 2, and Example 3. 

• Equations involving a single trigonometric function can be solved or verified using the unit circle. See Example 4, 
Example 5, and Example 6, and Example 7. 

• We can also solve trigonometric equations using a graphing calculator. See Example 8 and Example 9. 
• Many equations appear quadratic in form. We can use substitution to make the equation appear simpler, and then 

use the same techniques we use solving an algebraic quadratic: factoring, the quadratic formula, etc. See Example 
10, Example 11, Example 12, and Example 13. 

• We can also use the identities to solve trigonometric equation. See Example 14, Example 15, and Example 16. 
• We can use substitution to solve a multiple-angle trigonometric equation, which is a compression of a standard 

trigonometric function. We will need to take the compression into account and verify that we have found all 
solutions on the given interval. See Example 17. 

• Real-world scenarios can be modeled and solved using the Pythagorean Theorem and trigonometric functions. See 
Example 18. 

Exercises 
Review Exercises 
Simplifying and Verifying Trigonometric Identities 
For the following exercises, find all solutions exactly that exist on the interval 

1 .  2 .  3 . 

4 .  5 .  6 . 

For the following exercises, use basic identities to simplify the expression. 

7 .  8 . 

For the following exercises, determine if the given identities are equivalent. 

9 .  10 . 

Sum and Difference Identities 

For the following exercises, find the exact value. 

11 .  12 . 

13 .  14 . 

For the following exercises, prove the identity. 

15 .  16 . 

For the following exercise, simplify the expression. 

17 . 

For the following exercises, find the exact value. 

18 .  19 . 



866     9 • Exercises

Double-Angle, Half-Angle, and Reduction Formulas 

For the following exercises, find the exact value. 
20 . Find  and  given  21 . Find  and  given 

 and  is in the interval  and  is in the interval 

22 .  23 . 

For the following exercises, use Figure 1 to find the desired quantities. 

Figure 1 
24 . 

25 . 

For the following exercises, prove the identity. 

26 .  27 . 

For the following exercises, rewrite the expression with no powers. 

28 .  29 . 

Sum-to-Product and Product-to-Sum Formulas 

For the following exercises, evaluate the product for the given expression using a sum or difference of two functions. 
Write the exact answer. 

30 .  31 .  32 . 

For the following exercises, evaluate the sum by using a product formula. Write the exact answer. 

33 .  34 . 

For the following exercises, change the functions from a product to a sum or a sum to a product. 
35 .  36 .  37 . 
38 . 

Solving Trigonometric Equations 

For the following exercises, find all exact solutions on the interval 

39 .  40 . 

For the following exercises, find all exact solutions on the interval 

41 .  42 .  43 . 

44 .  45 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



9 • Exercises     867

For the following exercises, simplify the equation algebraically as much as possible. Then use a calculator to find the 
solutions on the interval  Round to four decimal places. 

46 .  47 . 

For the following exercises, graph each side of the equation to find the approximate solutions on the interval 

48 .  49 . 

Practice Test 
For the following exercises, simplify the given expression. 

1 .  2 . 

3 .  4 . 

For the following exercises, find the exact value. 

5 .  6 .  7 . 

8 .  9 .  10 . 

For the following exercises, simplify each expression. Do not evaluate. 

11 .  12 . 

For the following exercises, find all exact solutions to the equation on 

13 .  14 . 

15 . 16 . 
17 . Rewrite the expression as a product instead of a 

sum: 

For the following exercise, rewrite the product as a sum or difference. 
18 . 

For the following exercise, rewrite the sum or difference as a product. 
19 .  20 . Find all solutions of 21 . Find the solutions of 

 on 
the interval 
algebraically; then graph 
both sides of the equation 
to determine the answer. 

For the following exercises, find all solutions exactly on the interval 

22 . 23 .  24 . Find  and 
 given 

and  is on the interval 

25 . Find  and 26 . Rewrite the expression 
 given  with no powers 

and  is in quadrant IV. greater than 1. 



868     9 • Exercises

For the following exercises, prove the identity. 

27 . 28 . 

29 . 30 . Plot the points and find a function of the form 
 that fits the given data. 

31 . The displacement  in 32 . A woman is standing 300 33 . Two frequencies of sound are 
centimeters of a mass feet away from a 2000-foot played on an instrument 
suspended by a spring is building. If she looks to the governed by the equation 
modeled by the function top of the building, at what 

 where angle above horizontal is What are the period and 
 is measured in seconds. she looking? A worker frequency of the “fast” and 

Find the amplitude, period, looks down at her from the “slow” oscillations? What is the 
and frequency of this 15th floor (1500 feet above amplitude? 
displacement. her). At what angle is he 

looking down at her? 
Round to the nearest tenth 
of a degree. 

34 . The average monthly 35 . A spring attached to a 36 . Water levels near a glacier 
snowfall in a small village ceiling is pulled down 20 currently average 9 feet, 
in the Himalayas is 6 cm. After 3 seconds, varying seasonally by 2 
inches, with the low of 1 wherein it completes 6 full inches above and below 
inch occurring in July. periods, the amplitude is the average and reaching 
Construct a function that only 15 cm. Find the their highest point in 
models this behavior. function modeling the January. Due to global 
During what period is position of the spring warming, the glacier has 
there more than 10 inches seconds after being begun melting faster than 
of snowfall? released. At what time will normal. Every year, the 

the spring come to rest? In water levels rise by a 
this case, use 1 cm steady 3 inches. Find a 
amplitude as rest. function modeling the 

depth of the water 
months from now. If the 
docks are 2 feet above 
current water levels, at 
what point will the water 
first rise above the docks? 

Access for free at openstax.org



10 • Introduction to Further Applications of Trigonometry          869

10 FURTHER APPLICATIONS OF 
TRIGONOMETRY 

General Sherman, the world’s largest living tree. (credit: Mike Baird, Flickr) 

Chapter Outline 
10.1 Non-right Triangles: Law of Sines 
10.2 Non-right Triangles: Law of Cosines 
10.3 Polar Coordinates 
10.4 Polar Coordinates: Graphs 
10.5 Polar Form of Complex Numbers 
10.6 Parametric Equations 
10.7 Parametric Equations: Graphs 
10.8 Vectors 

Introduction to Further Applications of Trigonometry 
The world’s largest tree by volume, named General Sherman, stands 274.9 feet tall and resides in Northern California.1 

Just how do scientists know its true height? A common way to measure the height involves determining the angle of 
elevation, which is formed by the tree and the ground at a point some distance away from the base of the tree. This 
method is much more practical than climbing the tree and dropping a very long tape measure. 
In this chapter, we will explore applications of trigonometry that will enable us to solve many different kinds of problems, 
including finding the height of a tree. We extend topics we introduced in Trigonometric Functions (http://openstax.org/
books/precalculus-2e/pages/5-introduction-to-trigonometric-functions) and investigate applications more deeply and 
meaningfully. 

10.1 Non-right Triangles: Law of Sines 
Learning Objectives 
In this section, you will: 

Use the Law of Sines to solve oblique triangles. 
Find the area of an oblique triangle using the sine function. 
Solve applied problems using the Law of Sines. 

To ensure the safety of over 5,000 U.S. aircraft flying simultaneously during peak times, air traffic controllers monitor and 
communicate with them after receiving data from the robust radar beacon system. Suppose two radar stations located 
20 miles apart each detect an aircraft between them. The angle of elevation measured by the first station is 35 degrees, 
whereas the angle of elevation measured by the second station is 15 degrees. How can we determine the altitude of the 

1 Source: National Park Service. "The General Sherman Tree." http://www.nps.gov/seki/naturescience/sherman.htm. Accessed April 25, 2014. 



870     10 • Further Applications of Trigonometry

aircraft? We see in Figure 1 that the triangle formed by the aircraft and the two stations is not a right triangle, so we 
cannot use what we know about right triangles. In this section, we will find out how to solve problems involving non-
right triangles. 

Figure 1 

Using the Law of Sines to Solve Oblique Triangles 
In any triangle, we can draw an altitude, a perpendicular line from one vertex to the opposite side, forming two right 
triangles. It would be preferable, however, to have methods that we can apply directly to non-right triangles without first 
having to create right triangles. 
Any triangle that is not a right triangle is an oblique triangle. Solving an oblique triangle means finding the 
measurements of all three angles and all three sides. To do so, we need to start with at least three of these values, 
including at least one of the sides. We will investigate three possible oblique triangle problem situations: 
1. ASA (angle-side-angle) We know the measurements of two angles and the included side. See Figure 2. 

Figure 2 
2. AAS (angle-angle-side) We know the measurements of two angles and a side that is not between the known 

angles. See Figure 3. 

Figure 3 
3. SSA (side-side-angle) We know the measurements of two sides and an angle that is not between the known sides. 

See Figure 4. 

Figure 4 
Knowing how to approach each of these situations enables us to solve oblique triangles without having to drop a 
perpendicular to form two right triangles. Instead, we can use the fact that the ratio of the measurement of one of the 
angles to the length of its opposite side will be equal to the other two ratios of angle measure to opposite side. Let’s see 
how this statement is derived by considering the triangle shown in Figure 5. 

Access for free at openstax.org



10.1 • Non-right Triangles: Law of Sines     871

Figure 5 

Using the right triangle relationships, we know that  and  Solving both equations for  gives two 
different expressions for 

We then set the expressions equal to each other. 

Similarly, we can compare the other ratios. 

Collectively, these relationships are called the Law of Sines. 

Note the standard way of labeling triangles: angle  (alpha) is opposite side  angle  (beta) is opposite side  and 
angle  (gamma) is opposite side  See Figure 6. 
While calculating angles and sides, be sure to carry the exact values through to the final answer. Generally, final answers 
are rounded to the nearest tenth, unless otherwise specified. 

Figure 6 

Law of Sines 

Given a triangle with angles and opposite sides labeled as in Figure 6, the ratio of the measurement of an angle to the 
length of its opposite side will be equal to the other two ratios of angle measure to opposite side. All proportions will 
be equal. The Law of Sines is based on proportions and is presented symbolically two ways. 

To solve an oblique triangle, use any pair of applicable ratios. 



872     10 • Further Applications of Trigonometry

EXAMPLE 1 

Solving for Two Unknown Sides and Angle of an AAS Triangle 
Solve the triangle shown in Figure 7 to the nearest tenth. 

Figure 7 

Solution 
The three angles must add up to 180 degrees. From this, we can determine that 

To find an unknown side, we need to know the corresponding angle and a known ratio. We know that angle  and 
its corresponding side  We can use the following proportion from the Law of Sines to find the length of 

Similarly, to solve for  we set up another proportion. 

Therefore, the complete set of angles and sides is 

 TRY IT #1 Solve the triangle shown in Figure 8 to the nearest tenth. 

Access for free at openstax.org



10.1 • Non-right Triangles: Law of Sines     873

Figure 8 

Using The Law of Sines to Solve SSA Triangles 
We can use the Law of Sines to solve any oblique triangle, but some solutions may not be straightforward. In some 
cases, more than one triangle may satisfy the given criteria, which we describe as an ambiguous case. Triangles 
classified as SSA, those in which we know the lengths of two sides and the measurement of the angle opposite one of 
the given sides, may result in one or two solutions, or even no solution. 

Possible Outcomes for SSA Triangles 

Oblique triangles in the category SSA may have four different outcomes. Figure 9 illustrates the solutions with the 
known sides  and  and known angle 

Figure 9 

EXAMPLE 2 

Solving an Oblique SSA Triangle 
Solve the triangle in Figure 10 for the missing side and find the missing angle measures to the nearest tenth. 

Figure 10 

Solution 
Use the Law of Sines to find angle  and angle  and then side  Solving for  we have the proportion 



874     10 • Further Applications of Trigonometry

However, in the diagram, angle  appears to be an obtuse angle and may be greater than 90°. How did we get an acute 
angle, and how do we find the measurement of  Let’s investigate further. Dropping a perpendicular from  and viewing 
the triangle from a right angle perspective, we have Figure 11. It appears that there may be a second triangle that will fit 
the given criteria. 

Figure 11 
The angle supplementary to  is approximately equal to 49.9°, which means that  (Remember 
that the sine function is positive in both the first and second quadrants.) Solving for  we have 

We can then use these measurements to solve the other triangle. Since  is supplementary to the sum of  and  we 
have 

Now we need to find  and 
We have 

Finally, 

To summarize, there are two triangles with an angle of 35°, an adjacent side of 8, and an opposite side of 6, as shown in 
Figure 12. 

Access for free at openstax.org



10.1 • Non-right Triangles: Law of Sines     875

Figure 12 
However, we were looking for the values for the triangle with an obtuse angle  We can see them in the first triangle (a) 
in Figure 12. 

 TRY IT #2 Given  and  find the missing side and angles. If there is more than one 
possible solution, show both. 

EXAMPLE 3 

Solving for the Unknown Sides and Angles of a SSA Triangle 
In the triangle shown in Figure 13, solve for the unknown side and angles. Round your answers to the nearest tenth. 

Figure 13 

Solution 
In choosing the pair of ratios from the Law of Sines to use, look at the information given. In this case, we know the angle 

 and its corresponding side  and we know side  We will use this proportion to solve for 

To find  apply the inverse sine function. The inverse sine will produce a single result, but keep in mind that there may 
be two values for  It is important to verify the result, as there may be two viable solutions, only one solution (the usual 
case), or no solutions. 

In this case, if we subtract  from 180°, we find that there may be a second possible solution. Thus, 
 To check the solution, subtract both angles, 131.7° and 85°, from 180°. This gives 

which is impossible, and so 



876     10 • Further Applications of Trigonometry

To find the remaining missing values, we calculate  Now, only side  is needed. Use the 
Law of Sines to solve for  by one of the proportions. 

The complete set of solutions for the given triangle is 

 TRY IT #3 Given  find the missing side and angles. If there is more than one 
possible solution, show both. Round your answers to the nearest tenth. 

EXAMPLE 4 

Finding the Triangles That Meet the Given Criteria 
Find all possible triangles if one side has length 4 opposite an angle of 50°, and a second side has length 10. 

Solution 
Using the given information, we can solve for the angle opposite the side of length 10. See Figure 14. 

Figure 14 
We can stop here without finding the value of  Because the range of the sine function is  it is impossible for the 
sine value to be 1.915. In fact, inputting  in a graphing calculator generates an ERROR DOMAIN. Therefore, 
no triangles can be drawn with the provided dimensions. 

 TRY IT #4 Determine the number of triangles possible given   

Finding the Area of an Oblique Triangle Using the Sine Function 
Now that we can solve a triangle for missing values, we can use some of those values and the sine function to find the 
area of an oblique triangle. Recall that the area formula for a triangle is given as  where  is base and  is 
height. For oblique triangles, we must find  before we can use the area formula. Observing the two triangles in Figure 

Access for free at openstax.org



10.1 • Non-right Triangles: Law of Sines     877

15, one acute and one obtuse, we can drop a perpendicular to represent the height and then apply the trigonometric 
property  to write an equation for area in oblique triangles. In the acute triangle, we have 
or  However, in the obtuse triangle, we drop the perpendicular outside the triangle and extend the base  to 
form a right triangle. The angle used in calculation is  or 

Figure 15 
Thus, 

Similarly, 

Area of an Oblique Triangle 

The formula for the area of an oblique triangle is given by 

This is equivalent to one-half of the product of two sides and the sine of their included angle. 

EXAMPLE 5 

Finding the Area of an Oblique Triangle 
Find the area of a triangle with sides  and angle  Round the area to the nearest integer. 

Solution 
Using the formula, we have 

 TRY IT #5 Find the area of the triangle given    Round the area to the nearest 
tenth. 

Solving Applied Problems Using the Law of Sines 
The more we study trigonometric applications, the more we discover that the applications are countless. Some are flat, 
diagram-type situations, but many applications in calculus, engineering, and physics involve three dimensions and 
motion. 



878     10 • Further Applications of Trigonometry

EXAMPLE 6 

Finding an Altitude 
Find the altitude of the aircraft in the problem introduced at the beginning of this section, shown in Figure 16. Round the 
altitude to the nearest tenth of a mile. 

Figure 16 

Solution 
To find the elevation of the aircraft, we first find the distance from one station to the aircraft, such as the side  and then 
use right triangle relationships to find the height of the aircraft, 
Because the angles in the triangle add up to 180 degrees, the unknown angle must be 180°−15°−35°=130°. This angle is 
opposite the side of length 20, allowing us to set up a Law of Sines relationship. 

The distance from one station to the aircraft is about 14.98 miles. 
Now that we know  we can use right triangle relationships to solve for 

The aircraft is at an altitude of approximately 3.9 miles. 

 TRY IT #6 The diagram shown in Figure 17 represents the height of a blimp flying over a football stadium. 
Find the height of the blimp if the angle of elevation at the southern end zone, point A, is 70°, the 
angle of elevation from the northern end zone, point  is 62°, and the distance between the 
viewing points of the two end zones is 145 yards. 

Access for free at openstax.org



10.1 • Non-right Triangles: Law of Sines     879

Figure 17 

 MEDIA 

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with trigonometric applications. 

Law of Sines: The Basics (https://openstax.org/l/sinesbasic) 
Law of Sines: The Ambiguous Case (https://openstax.org/l/sinesambiguous) 

 10.1 SECTION EXERCISES 
Verbal 

1 . Describe the altitude of a  2 . Compare right triangles and  3 . When can you use the Law 
triangle. oblique triangles. of Sines to find a missing 

angle? 
4 . In the Law of Sines, what is  5 . What type of triangle results 

the relationship between in an ambiguous case? 
the angle in the numerator 
and the side in the 
denominator? 

Algebraic 

For the following exercises, assume  is opposite side  is opposite side  and  is opposite side  Solve each triangle, 
if possible. Round each answer to the nearest tenth. 
6 .  7 .  8 .   
9 .    10 .  



880     10 • Further Applications of Trigonometry

For the following exercises, use the Law of Sines to solve for the missing side for each oblique triangle. Round each 
answer to the nearest hundredth. Assume that angle  is opposite side  angle  is opposite side  and angle  is 
opposite side 
11 . Find side  when  12 . Find side  when  13 . Find side  when 

  

For the following exercises, assume  is opposite side  is opposite side  and  is opposite side  Determine whether 
there is no triangle, one triangle, or two triangles. Then solve each triangle, if possible. Round each answer to the 
nearest tenth. 
14 .  15 .  16 .   
17 .    18 .    19 .   
20 .  21 .  22 . 
23 . 

For the following exercises, use the Law of Sines to solve, if possible, the missing side or angle for each triangle or 
triangles in the ambiguous case. Round each answer to the nearest tenth. 
24 . Find angle  when  25 . Find angle  when  26 . Find angle  when 

For the following exercises, find the area of the triangle with the given measurements. Round each answer to the nearest 
tenth. 
27 .  28 .  29 . 
30 . 

Graphical 

For the following exercises, find the length of side  Round to the nearest tenth. 
31 . 32 . 33 . 

34 . 35 . 36 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



10.1 • Non-right Triangles: Law of Sines     881

For the following exercises, find the measure of angle  if possible. Round to the nearest tenth. 
37 . 38 . 39 . 

40 . 41 . Notice that  is an obtuse 42 . 
angle. 

For the following exercise, solve the triangle. Round each answer to the nearest tenth. 
43 . 44 . For the following exercises, find 45 . 

the area of each triangle. Round 
each answer to the nearest tenth. 

46 . 47 . 48 . 



882     10 • Further Applications of Trigonometry

49 . 

Extensions 

50 . Find the radius of the circle 51 . Find the diameter of the 52 . Find  in Figure 20. 
in Figure 18. Round to the circle in Figure 19. Round Round to the nearest tenth. 
nearest tenth. to the nearest tenth. 

Figure 20 

Figure 18 Figure 19 

53 . Find  in Figure 21. Round to the 54 . Solve both triangles in Figure 22.  55 . Find  in the 
nearest tenth. Round each answer to the nearest parallelogram shown in 

tenth. Figure 23. 

Figure 21 
Figure 23 

Figure 22 

Access for free at openstax.org



10.1 • Non-right Triangles: Law of Sines     883

56 . Solve the triangle in Figure 24. (Hint5: 7 . Solve the triangle in Figure  58 . In Figure 26,  is not a 
Draw a perpendicular from  to 25. (Hint: Draw a parallelogram.  is obtuse. Solve 

 Round each answer to the perpendicular from  to both triangles. Round each answer 
nearest tenth.  Round each answer to the nearest tenth. 

to the nearest tenth. 

Figure 24 

Figure 25 

Figure 26 

Real-World Applications 

59 . A pole leans away from the sun at an angle of  60 . To determine how far a boat is from shore, two 
to the vertical, as shown in Figure 27. When the radar stations 500 feet apart find the angles out to 
elevation of the sun is  the pole casts a the boat, as shown in Figure 28. Determine the 
shadow 42 feet long on the level ground. How distance of the boat from station  and the 
long is the pole? Round the answer to the nearest distance of the boat from shore. Round your 
tenth. answers to the nearest whole foot. 

Figure 27 
Figure 28 



884     10 • Further Applications of Trigonometry

61 . Figure 29 shows a satellite orbiting Earth. The  62 . A communications tower is located at the top of a 
satellite passes directly over two tracking stations steep hill, as shown in Figure 30. The angle of 

 and  which are 69 miles apart. When the inclination of the hill is  A guy wire is to be 
satellite is on one side of the two stations, the attached to the top of the tower and to the 
angles of elevation at  and  are measured to be ground, 165 meters downhill from the base of the 

 and  respectively. How far is the tower. The angle formed by the guy wire and the 
satellite from station  and how high is the hill is  Find the length of the cable required for 
satellite above the ground? Round answers to the the guy wire to the nearest whole meter. 
nearest whole mile. 

Figure 30 

Figure 29 

63 . The roof of a house is at a  angle. An 8-foot solar 
panel is to be mounted on the roof and should be 
angled  relative to the horizontal for optimal 
results. (See Figure 31). How long does the vertical 
support holding up the back of the panel need to be? 
Round to the nearest tenth. 

Figure 31 

Access for free at openstax.org



10.1 • Non-right Triangles: Law of Sines     885

64 . Similar to an angle of elevation, an angle of  65 . A pilot is flying over a straight highway. He 
depression is the acute angle formed by a determines the angles of depression to two 
horizontal line and an observer’s line of sight to mileposts, 4.3 km apart, to be 32° and 56°, as 
an object below the horizontal. A pilot is flying shown in Figure 33. Find the distance of the plane 
over a straight highway. He determines the angles from point  to the nearest tenth of a kilometer. 
of depression to two mileposts, 6.6 km apart, to 
be  and  as shown in Figure 32. Find the 
distance of the plane from point  to the nearest 
tenth of a kilometer. 

Figure 33 
Figure 32 

66 . In order to estimate the height of a building, two  67 . In order to estimate the 
students stand at a certain distance from the height of a building, two 
building at street level. From this point, they find students stand at a certain 
the angle of elevation from the street to the top of distance from the building 
the building to be 39°. They then move 300 feet at street level. From this 
closer to the building and find the angle of point, they find the angle 
elevation to be 50°. Assuming that the street is of elevation from the street 
level, estimate the height of the building to the to the top of the building 
nearest foot. to be 35°. They then move 

250 feet closer to the 
building and find the angle 
of elevation to be 53°. 
Assuming that the street is 
level, estimate the height 
of the building to the 
nearest foot. 

68 . Points  and  are on  69 . A man and a woman  70 . Two search teams spot a 
opposite sides of a lake. standing  miles apart stranded climber on a 
Point  is 97 meters from spot a hot air balloon at mountain. The first search 

 The measure of angle the same time. If the angle team is 0.5 miles from the 
 is determined to be of elevation from the man second search team, and 

101°, and the measure of to the balloon is 27°, and both teams are at an 
angle  is determined the angle of elevation from altitude of 1 mile. The 
to be 53°. What is the the woman to the balloon angle of elevation from the 
distance from  to is 41°, find the altitude of first search team to the 
rounded to the nearest the balloon to the nearest stranded climber is 15°. 
whole meter? foot. The angle of elevation from 

the second search team to 
the climber is 22°. What is 
the altitude of the climber? 
Round to the nearest tenth 
of a mile. 



886     10 • Further Applications of Trigonometry

71 . A street light is mounted  72 . Three cities,  and 
on a pole. A 6-foot-tall man are located so that city  is 
is standing on the street a due east of city  If city 
short distance from the is located 35° west of north 
pole, casting a shadow. The from city  and is 100 
angle of elevation from the miles from city  and 70 
tip of the man’s shadow to miles from city  how far 
the top of his head of 28°. is city  from city 
A 6-foot-tall woman is Round the distance to the 
standing on the same nearest tenth of a mile. 
street on the opposite side 
of the pole from the man. 
The angle of elevation from 
the tip of her shadow to 
the top of her head is 28°. 
If the man and woman are 
20 feet apart, how far is the 
street light from the tip of 
the shadow of each 
person? Round the 
distance to the nearest 
tenth of a foot. 

73 . Two streets meet at an 80° angle. At the corner, a 
park is being built in the shape of a triangle. Find 
the area of the park if, along one road, the park 
measures 180 feet, and along the other road, the 
park measures 215 feet. 

74 . Brian’s house is on a corner lot. Find the area of the  75 . The Bermuda triangle is a 
front yard if the edges measure 40 and 56 feet, as region of the Atlantic 
shown in Figure 34. Ocean that connects 

Bermuda, Florida, and 
Puerto Rico. Find the area 
of the Bermuda triangle if 
the distance from Florida 
to Bermuda is 1030 miles, 
the distance from Puerto 

Figure 34 Rico to Bermuda is 980 
miles, and the angle 
created by the two 
distances is 62°. 

76 . A yield sign measures 30  77 . Naomi bought a dining table whose 
inches on all three sides. top is in the shape of a triangle. Find 
What is the area of the the area of the table top if two of 
sign? the sides measure 4 feet and 4.5 

feet, and the smaller angles 
measure 32° and 42°, as shown in 
Figure 35. 

Figure 35 

Access for free at openstax.org



10.2 • Non-right Triangles: Law of Cosines     887

10.2 Non-right Triangles: Law of Cosines 
Learning Objectives 
In this section, you will: 

Use the Law of Cosines to solve oblique triangles. 
Solve applied problems using the Law of Cosines. 
Use Heron’s formula to find the area of a triangle. 

Suppose a boat leaves port, travels 10 miles, turns 20 degrees, and travels another 8 miles as shown in Figure 1. How far 
from port is the boat? 

Figure 1 
Unfortunately, while the Law of Sines enables us to address many non-right triangle cases, it does not help us with 
triangles where the known angle is between two known sides, a SAS (side-angle-side) triangle, or when all three sides are 
known, but no angles are known, a SSS (side-side-side) triangle. In this section, we will investigate another tool for 
solving oblique triangles described by these last two cases. 

Using the Law of Cosines to Solve Oblique Triangles 
The tool we need to solve the problem of the boat’s distance from the port is the Law of Cosines, which defines the 
relationship among angle measurements and side lengths in oblique triangles. Three formulas make up the Law of 
Cosines. At first glance, the formulas may appear complicated because they include many variables. However, once the 
pattern is understood, the Law of Cosines is easier to work with than most formulas at this mathematical level. 
Understanding how the Law of Cosines is derived will be helpful in using the formulas. The derivation begins with the 
Generalized Pythagorean Theorem, which is an extension of the Pythagorean Theorem to non-right triangles. Here is 
how it works: An arbitrary non-right triangle  is placed in the coordinate plane with vertex  at the origin, side 
drawn along the x-axis, and vertex  located at some point  in the plane, as illustrated in Figure 2. Generally, 
triangles exist anywhere in the plane, but for this explanation we will place the triangle as noted. 



888     10 • Further Applications of Trigonometry

Figure 2 
We can drop a perpendicular from  to the x-axis (this is the altitude or height). Recalling the basic trigonometric 
identities, we know that 

In terms of  and  The  point located at  has coordinates   Using the 
side  as one leg of a right triangle and  as the second leg, we can find the length of hypotenuse  using the 
Pythagorean Theorem. Thus, 

The formula derived is one of the three equations of the Law of Cosines. The other equations are found in a similar 
fashion. 
Keep in mind that it is always helpful to sketch the triangle when solving for angles or sides. In a real-world scenario, try 
to draw a diagram of the situation. As more information emerges, the diagram may have to be altered. Make those 
alterations to the diagram and, in the end, the problem will be easier to solve. 

Law of Cosines 

The Law of Cosines states that the square of any side of a triangle is equal to the sum of the squares of the other two 
sides minus twice the product of the other two sides and the cosine of the included angle. For triangles labeled as in 
Figure 3, with angles  and  and opposite corresponding sides  and  respectively, the Law of Cosines is 
given as three equations. 

Access for free at openstax.org



10.2 • Non-right Triangles: Law of Cosines     889

Figure 3 

To solve for a missing side measurement, the corresponding opposite angle measure is needed. 

When solving for an angle, the corresponding opposite side measure is needed. We can use another version of the 
Law of Cosines to solve for an angle. 

...
HOW TO 

Given two sides and the angle between them (SAS), find the measures of the remaining side and angles of a 
triangle. 

1. Sketch the triangle. Identify the measures of the known sides and angles. Use variables to represent the 
measures of the unknown sides and angles. 

2. Apply the Law of Cosines to find the length of the unknown side or angle. 
3. Apply the Law of Sines or Cosines to find the measure of a second angle. 
4. Compute the measure of the remaining angle. 

EXAMPLE 1 

Finding the Unknown Side and Angles of a SAS Triangle 
Find the unknown side and angles of the triangle in Figure 4. 

Figure 4 

Solution 
First, make note of what is given: two sides and the angle between them. This arrangement is classified as SAS and 
supplies the data needed to apply the Law of Cosines. 



890     10 • Further Applications of Trigonometry

Each one of the three laws of cosines begins with the square of an unknown side opposite a known angle. For this 
example, the first side to solve for is side  as we know the measurement of the opposite angle 

Because we are solving for a length, we use only the positive square root. Now that we know the length  we can use 
the Law of Sines to fill in the remaining angles of the triangle. Solving for angle  we have 

The other possibility for  would be  In the original diagram,  is adjacent to the longest side, 
so  is an acute angle and, therefore,  does not make sense. Notice that if we choose to apply the Law of Cosines, 
we arrive at a unique answer. We do not have to consider the other possibilities, as cosine is unique for angles between 

 and  Proceeding with  we can then find the third angle of the triangle. 

The complete set of angles and sides is 

 TRY IT #1 Find the missing side and angles of the given triangle:   

EXAMPLE 2 

Solving for an Angle of a SSS Triangle 
Find the angle  for the given triangle if side  side  and side 

Solution 
For this example, we have no angles. We can solve for any angle using the Law of Cosines. To solve for angle  we have 

Access for free at openstax.org



10.2 • Non-right Triangles: Law of Cosines     891

See Figure 5. 

Figure 5 

Analysis 
Because the inverse cosine can return any angle between 0 and 180 degrees, there will not be any ambiguous cases 
using this method. 

 TRY IT #2 Given  and  find the missing angles. 

Solving Applied Problems Using the Law of Cosines 
Just as the Law of Sines provided the appropriate equations to solve a number of applications, the Law of Cosines is 
applicable to situations in which the given data fits the cosine models. We may see these in the fields of navigation, 
surveying, astronomy, and geometry, just to name a few. 

EXAMPLE 3 

Using the Law of Cosines to Solve a Communication Problem 
On many cell phones with GPS, an approximate location can be given before the GPS signal is received. This is 
accomplished through a process called triangulation, which works by using the distances from two known points. 
Suppose there are two cell phone towers within range of a cell phone. The two towers are located 6000 feet apart along 
a straight highway, running east to west, and the cell phone is north of the highway. Based on the signal delay, it can be 
determined that the signal is 5,050 feet from the first tower and 2,420 feet from the second tower. Determine the 
position of the cell phone north and east of the first tower, and determine how far it is from the highway. 

Solution 
For simplicity, we start by drawing a diagram similar to Figure 6 and labeling our given information. 



892     10 • Further Applications of Trigonometry

Figure 6 
Using the Law of Cosines, we can solve for the angle  Remember that the Law of Cosines uses the square of one side to 
find the cosine of the opposite angle. For this example, let  and  Thus,  corresponds to 
the opposite side 

To answer the questions about the phone’s position north and east of the tower, and the distance to the highway, drop a 
perpendicular from the position of the cell phone, as in Figure 7. This forms two right triangles, although we only need 
the right triangle that includes the first tower for this problem. 

Figure 7 
Using the angle  and the basic trigonometric identities, we can find the solutions. Thus 

The cell phone is approximately 4,638 feet east and 1998 feet north of the first tower, and 1998 feet from the highway. 

EXAMPLE 4 

Calculating Distance Traveled Using a SAS Triangle 
Returning to our problem at the beginning of this section, suppose a boat leaves port, travels 10 miles, turns 20 degrees, 
and travels another 8 miles. How far from port is the boat? The diagram is repeated here in Figure 8. 

Access for free at openstax.org



10.2 • Non-right Triangles: Law of Cosines     893

Figure 8 

Solution 
The boat turned 20 degrees, so the obtuse angle of the non-right triangle is the supplemental angle, 
With this, we can utilize the Law of Cosines to find the missing side of the obtuse triangle—the distance of the boat to 
the port. 

The boat is about 17.7 miles from port. 

Using Heron’s Formula to Find the Area of a Triangle 
We already learned how to find the area of an oblique triangle when we know two sides and an angle. We also know the 
formula to find the area of a triangle using the base and the height. When we know the three sides, however, we can use 
Heron’s formula instead of finding the height. Heron of Alexandria was a geometer who lived during the first century 
A.D. He discovered a formula for finding the area of oblique triangles when three sides are known. 

Heron’s Formula 

Heron’s formula finds the area of oblique triangles in which sides  and  are known. 

where  is one half of the perimeter of the triangle, sometimes called the semi-perimeter. 

EXAMPLE 5 

Using Heron’s Formula to Find the Area of a Given Triangle 
Find the area of the triangle in Figure 9 using Heron’s formula. 



894     10 • Further Applications of Trigonometry

Figure 9 

Solution 
First, we calculate 

Then we apply the formula. 

The area is approximately 29.4 square units. 

 TRY IT #3 Use Heron’s formula to find the area of a triangle with sides of lengths 
and 

EXAMPLE 6 

Applying Heron’s Formula to a Real-World Problem 
A Chicago city developer wants to construct a building consisting of artist’s lofts on a triangular lot bordered by Rush 
Street, Wabash Avenue, and Pearson Street. The frontage along Rush Street is approximately 62.4 meters, along Wabash 
Avenue it is approximately 43.5 meters, and along Pearson Street it is approximately 34.1 meters. How many square 
meters are available to the developer? See Figure 10 for a view of the city property. 

Figure 10 

Access for free at openstax.org



10.2 • Non-right Triangles: Law of Cosines     895

Solution 
Find the measurement for  which is one-half of the perimeter. 

Apply Heron’s formula. 

The developer has about 711.4 square meters. 

 TRY IT #4 Find the area of a triangle given  and 

 MEDIA 

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with the Law of Cosines. 

Law of Cosines (https://openstax.org/l/lawcosines) 
Law of Cosines: Applications (https://openstax.org/l/cosineapp) 
Law of Cosines: Applications 2 (https://openstax.org/l/cosineapp2) 

 10.2 SECTION EXERCISES 
Verbal 

1 . If you are looking for a  2 . If you are looking for a  3 . Explain what  represents in 
missing side of a triangle, missing angle of a triangle, Heron’s formula. 
what do you need to know what do you need to know 
when using the Law of when using the Law of 
Cosines? Cosines? 

4 . Explain the relationship  5 . When must you use the Law 
between the Pythagorean of Cosines instead of the 
Theorem and the Law of Pythagorean Theorem? 
Cosines. 

Algebraic 

For the following exercises, assume  is opposite side  is opposite side  and  is opposite side  If possible, solve 
each triangle for the unknown side. Round to the nearest tenth. 
6 .  7 .  8 . 
9 .  10 .  11 . 
12 .  13 .  14 . 
15 . 

For the following exercises, use the Law of Cosines to solve for the missing angle of the oblique triangle. Round to the 
nearest tenth. 
16 .  find  17 .  18 .  find 

angle find angle angle 



896     10 • Further Applications of Trigonometry

19 .  20 . 
find angle find angle 

For the following exercises, solve the triangle. Round to the nearest tenth. 
21 .  22 .  23 . 
24 .  25 .  26 . 

For the following exercises, use Heron’s formula to find the area of the triangle. Round to the nearest hundredth. 

27 . Find the area of a triangle  28 . Find the area of a triangle  29 . 
with sides of length 18 in, with sides of length 20 cm, 
21 in, and 32 in. Round to 26 cm, and 37 cm. Round 
the nearest tenth. to the nearest tenth. 

30 .  31 . 

Graphical 

For the following exercises, find the length of side  Round to the nearest tenth. 
32 . 33 . 34 . 

35 . 36 . 37 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



10.2 • Non-right Triangles: Law of Cosines     897

For the following exercises, find the measurement of angle 
38 . 39 . 40 . 

41 . 42 . Find the measure of each angle in 
the triangle shown in Figure 11. 
Round to the nearest tenth. 

Figure 11 

For the following exercises, solve for the unknown side. Round to the nearest tenth. 
43 . 44 . 45 . 

46 . 



898     10 • Further Applications of Trigonometry

For the following exercises, find the area of the triangle. Round to the nearest hundredth. 
47 . 48 . 49 . 

50 . 51 . 

Extensions 

52 . A parallelogram has sides  53 . The sides of a  54 . The sides of a 
of length 16 units and 10 parallelogram are 11 feet parallelogram are 28 
units. The shorter diagonal and 17 feet. The longer centimeters and 40 
is 12 units. Find the diagonal is 22 feet. Find centimeters. The measure 
measure of the longer the length of the shorter of the larger angle is 100°. 
diagonal. diagonal. Find the length of the 

shorter diagonal. 
55 . A regular octagon is  56 . A regular pentagon is 

inscribed in a circle with a inscribed in a circle of 
radius of 8 inches. (See radius 12 cm. (See Figure 
Figure 12.) Find the 13.) Find the perimeter of 
perimeter of the octagon. the pentagon. Round to 

the nearest tenth of a 
centimeter. 

Figure 12 

Figure 13 

For the following exercises, suppose that  represents the relationship of three sides of a 
triangle and the cosine of an angle. 
57 . Draw the triangle. 58 . Find the length of the third 

side. 

Access for free at openstax.org



10.2 • Non-right Triangles: Law of Cosines     899

For the following exercises, find the area of the triangle. 
59 . 60 . 61 . 

Real-World Applications 

62 . A surveyor has taken the  63 . A satellite calculates the distances  64 . An airplane flies 220 miles 
measurements shown in Figure 14. and angle shown in Figure 15 (not to with a heading of 40°, and 
Find the distance across the lake. scale). Find the distance between then flies 180 miles with a 
Round answers to the nearest tenth. the two cities. Round answers to the heading of 170°. How far is 

nearest tenth. the plane from its starting 
point, and at what 
heading? Round answers 
to the nearest tenth. 

Figure 14 

Figure 15 



900     10 • Further Applications of Trigonometry

65 . A 113-foot tower is located on a hill 66 . Two ships left a port at the  67 . The graph in Figure 17 represents 
that is inclined 34° to the horizontal, same time. One ship two boats departing at the same 
as shown in Figure 16. A guy-wire is traveled at a speed of 18 time from the same dock. The first 
to be attached to the top of the miles per hour at a boat is traveling at 18 miles per 
tower and anchored at a point 98 heading of 320°. The other hour at a heading of 327° and the 
feet uphill from the base of the ship traveled at a speed of second boat is traveling at 4 miles 
tower. Find the length of wire 22 miles per hour at a per hour at a heading of 60°. Find 
needed. heading of 194°. Find the the distance between the two boats 

distance between the two after 2 hours. 
ships after 10 hours of 
travel. 

Figure 16 

Figure 17 

68 . A triangular swimming  69 . A pilot flies in a straight  70 . Los Angeles is 1,744 miles 
pool measures 40 feet on path for 1 hour 30 min. She from Chicago, Chicago is 
one side and 65 feet on then makes a course 714 miles from New York, 
another side. These sides correction, heading 10° to and New York is 2,451 
form an angle that the right of her original miles from Los Angeles. 
measures 50°. How long is course, and flies 2 hours in Draw a triangle connecting 
the third side (to the the new direction. If she these three cities, and find 
nearest tenth)? maintains a constant speed the angles in the triangle. 

of 680 miles per hour, how 
far is she from her starting 
position? 

71 . Philadelphia is 140 miles 72 . Two planes leave the same  73 . Two airplanes take off in 
from Washington, D.C., airport at the same time. different directions. One 
Washington, D.C. is 442 One flies at 20° east of travels 300 mph due west 
miles from Boston, and north at 500 miles per and the other travels 25° 
Boston is 315 miles from hour. The second flies at north of west at 420 mph. 
Philadelphia. Draw a 30° east of south at 600 After 90 minutes, how far 
triangle connecting these miles per hour. How far apart are they, assuming 
three cities and find the apart are the planes after 2 they are flying at the same 
angles in the triangle. hours? altitude? 

74 . A parallelogram has sides  75 . The four sequential sides  76 . The four sequential sides 
of length 15.4 units and 9.8 of a quadrilateral have of a quadrilateral have 
units. Its area is 72.9 lengths 4.5 cm, 7.9 cm, 9.4 lengths 5.7 cm, 7.2 cm, 9.4 
square units. Find the cm, and 12.9 cm. The angle cm, and 12.8 cm. The angle 
measure of the longer between the two smallest between the two smallest 
diagonal. sides is 117°. What is the sides is 106°. What is the 

area of this quadrilateral? area of this quadrilateral? 

Access for free at openstax.org



10.3 • Polar Coordinates     901

77 . Find the area of a  78 . Find the area of a 
triangular piece of land triangular piece of land 
that measures 30 feet on that measures 110 feet on 
one side and 42 feet on one side and 250 feet on 
another; the included another; the included 
angle measures 132°. angle measures 85°. Round 
Round to the nearest to the nearest whole 
whole square foot. square foot. 

10.3 Polar Coordinates 
Learning Objectives 
In this section, you will: 

Plot points using polar coordinates. 
Convert from polar coordinates to rectangular coordinates. 
Convert from rectangular coordinates to polar coordinates. 
Transform equations between polar and rectangular forms. 
Identify and graph polar equations by converting to rectangular equations. 

Over 12 kilometers from port, a sailboat encounters rough weather and is blown off course by a 16-knot wind (see Figure 
1). How can the sailor indicate his location to the Coast Guard? In this section, we will investigate a method of 
representing location that is different from a standard coordinate grid. 

Figure 1 

Plotting Points Using Polar Coordinates 
When we think about plotting points in the plane, we usually think of rectangular coordinates  in the Cartesian 
coordinate plane. However, there are other ways of writing a coordinate pair and other types of grid systems. In this 
section, we introduce to polar coordinates, which are points labeled  and plotted on a polar grid. The polar grid is 
represented as a series of concentric circles radiating out from the pole, or the origin of the coordinate plane. 
The polar grid is scaled as the unit circle with the positive x-axis now viewed as the polar axis and the origin as the pole. 
The first coordinate  is the radius or length of the directed line segment from the pole. The angle  measured in 
radians, indicates the direction of  We move counterclockwise from the polar axis by an angle of  and measure a 
directed line segment the length of  in the direction of  Even though we measure  first and then  the polar point is 
written with the r-coordinate first. For example, to plot the point  we would move  units in the counterclockwise 
direction and then a length of 2 from the pole. This point is plotted on the grid in Figure 2. 



902     10 • Further Applications of Trigonometry

Figure 2 

EXAMPLE 1 

Plotting a Point on the Polar Grid 
Plot the point  on the polar grid. 

Solution 
The angle  is found by sweeping in a counterclockwise direction 90° from the polar axis. The point is located at a length 
of 3 units from the pole in the  direction, as shown in Figure 3. 

Figure 3 

 TRY IT #1 Plot the point  in the polar grid. 

EXAMPLE 2 

Plotting a Point in the Polar Coordinate System with a Negative Component 
Plot the point  on the polar grid. 

Solution 
We know that  is located in the first quadrant. However,  We can approach plotting a point with a negative  in 
two ways: 

Access for free at openstax.org



10.3 • Polar Coordinates     903

1. Plot the point  by moving  in the counterclockwise direction and extending a directed line segment 2 units 
into the first quadrant. Then retrace the directed line segment back through the pole, and continue 2 units into the 
third quadrant; 

2. Move  in the counterclockwise direction, and draw the directed line segment from the pole 2 units in the negative 
direction, into the third quadrant. 

See Figure 4(a). Compare this to the graph of the polar coordinate  shown in Figure 4(b). 

Figure 4 

 TRY IT #2 Plot the points  and  on the same polar grid. 

Converting from Polar Coordinates to Rectangular Coordinates 
When given a set of polar coordinates, we may need to convert them to rectangular coordinates. To do so, we can recall 
the relationships that exist among the variables  and 

Dropping a perpendicular from the point in the plane to the x-axis forms a right triangle, as illustrated in Figure 5. An 
easy way to remember the equations above is to think of  as the adjacent side over the hypotenuse and  as 
the opposite side over the hypotenuse. 

Figure 5 

Converting from Polar Coordinates to Rectangular Coordinates 

To convert polar coordinates  to rectangular coordinates  let 



904     10 • Further Applications of Trigonometry

...
HOW TO 

Given polar coordinates, convert to rectangular coordinates. 

1. Given the polar coordinate  write  and 
2. Evaluate  and 
3. Multiply  by  to find the x-coordinate of the rectangular form. 
4. Multiply  by  to find the y-coordinate of the rectangular form. 

EXAMPLE 3 

Writing Polar Coordinates as Rectangular Coordinates 
Write the polar coordinates  as rectangular coordinates. 

Solution 
Use the equivalent relationships. 

The rectangular coordinates are  See Figure 6. 

Figure 6 

EXAMPLE 4 

Writing Polar Coordinates as Rectangular Coordinates 
Write the polar coordinates  as rectangular coordinates. 

Access for free at openstax.org



10.3 • Polar Coordinates     905

Solution 
See Figure 7. Writing the polar coordinates as rectangular, we have 

The rectangular coordinates are also 

Figure 7 

 TRY IT #3 Write the polar coordinates  as rectangular coordinates. 

Converting from Rectangular Coordinates to Polar Coordinates 
To convert rectangular coordinates to polar coordinates, we will use two other familiar relationships. With this 
conversion, however, we need to be aware that a set of rectangular coordinates will yield more than one polar point. 

Converting from Rectangular Coordinates to Polar Coordinates 

Converting from rectangular coordinates to polar coordinates requires the use of one or more of the relationships 
illustrated in Figure 8. 



906     10 • Further Applications of Trigonometry

Figure 8 

EXAMPLE 5 

Writing Rectangular Coordinates as Polar Coordinates 
Convert the rectangular coordinates  to polar coordinates. 

Solution 
We see that the original point  is in the first quadrant. To find  use the formula  This gives 

To find  we substitute the values for  and  into the formula  We know that  must be positive, as  is in 
the first quadrant. Thus 

So,  and  giving us the polar point  See Figure 9. 

Figure 9 

Analysis 
There are other sets of polar coordinates that will be the same as our first solution. For example, the points 

Access for free at openstax.org



10.3 • Polar Coordinates     907

 and  will coincide with the original solution of  The point 
indicates a move further counterclockwise by  which is directly opposite  The radius is expressed as  However, 
the angle  is located in the third quadrant and, as  is negative, we extend the directed line segment in the opposite 
direction, into the first quadrant. This is the same point as  The point  is a move further 
clockwise by  from  The radius,  is the same. 

Transforming Equations between Polar and Rectangular Forms 
We can now convert coordinates between polar and rectangular form. Converting equations can be more difficult, but it 
can be beneficial to be able to convert between the two forms. Since there are a number of polar equations that cannot 
be expressed clearly in Cartesian form, and vice versa, we can use the same procedures we used to convert points 
between the coordinate systems. We can then use a graphing calculator to graph either the rectangular form or the 
polar form of the equation. 

...
HOW TO 

Given an equation in polar form, graph it using a graphing calculator. 

1. Change the MODE to POL, representing polar form. 
2. Press the Y= button to bring up a screen allowing the input of six equations: 
3. Enter the polar equation, set equal to 
4. Press GRAPH. 

EXAMPLE 6 

Writing a Cartesian Equation in Polar Form 
Write the Cartesian equation  in polar form. 

Solution 
The goal is to eliminate  and  from the equation and introduce  and  Ideally, we would write the equation  as a 
function of  To obtain the polar form, we will use the relationships between  and  Since  and 

 we can substitute and solve for 

Thus,  and  should generate the same graph. See Figure 10. 



908     10 • Further Applications of Trigonometry

Figure 10 (a) Cartesian form  (b) Polar form 
To graph a circle in rectangular form, we must first solve for 

Note that this is two separate functions, since a circle fails the vertical line test. Therefore, we need to enter the positive 
and negative square roots into the calculator separately, as two equations in the form  and 

 Press GRAPH. 

EXAMPLE 7 

Rewriting a Cartesian Equation as a Polar Equation 
Rewrite the Cartesian equation  as a polar equation. 

Solution 
This equation appears similar to the previous example, but it requires different steps to convert the equation. 
We can still follow the same procedures we have already learned and make the following substitutions: 

Therefore, the equations  and  should give us the same graph. See Figure 11. 

Access for free at openstax.org



10.3 • Polar Coordinates     909

Figure 11 (a) Cartesian form  (b) polar form 
The Cartesian or rectangular equation is plotted on the rectangular grid, and the polar equation is plotted on the polar 
grid. Clearly, the graphs are identical. 

EXAMPLE 8 

Rewriting a Cartesian Equation in Polar Form 
Rewrite the Cartesian equation  as a polar equation. 

Solution 
We will use the relationships  and 

 TRY IT #4 Rewrite the Cartesian equation  in polar form. 

Identify and Graph Polar Equations by Converting to Rectangular Equations 
We have learned how to convert rectangular coordinates to polar coordinates, and we have seen that the points are 
indeed the same. We have also transformed polar equations to rectangular equations and vice versa. Now we will 
demonstrate that their graphs, while drawn on different grids, are identical. 

EXAMPLE 9 

Graphing a Polar Equation by Converting to a Rectangular Equation 
Covert the polar equation  to a rectangular equation, and draw its corresponding graph. 

Solution 
The conversion is 

Notice that the equation  drawn on the polar grid is clearly the same as the vertical line  drawn on the 



910     10 • Further Applications of Trigonometry

rectangular grid (see Figure 12). Just as  is the standard form for a vertical line in rectangular form,  is 
the standard form for a vertical line in polar form. 

Figure 12 (a) Polar grid (b) Rectangular coordinate system 
A similar discussion would demonstrate that the graph of the function  will be the horizontal line  In 
fact,  is the standard form for a horizontal line in polar form, corresponding to the rectangular form 

EXAMPLE 10 

Rewriting a Polar Equation in Cartesian Form 
Rewrite the polar equation  as a Cartesian equation. 

Solution 
The goal is to eliminate  and  and introduce  and  We clear the fraction, and then use substitution. In order to 
replace  with  and  we must use the expression 

The Cartesian equation is  However, to graph it, especially using a graphing calculator or computer 
program, we want to isolate 

When our entire equation has been changed from  and  to  and  we can stop, unless asked to solve for  or simplify. 
See Figure 13. 

Access for free at openstax.org



10.3 • Polar Coordinates     911

Figure 13 
The “hour-glass” shape of the graph is called a hyperbola. Hyperbolas have many interesting geometric features and 
applications, which we will investigate further in Analytic Geometry. 

Analysis 
In this example, the right side of the equation can be expanded and the equation simplified further, as shown above. 
However, the equation cannot be written as a single function in Cartesian form. We may wish to write the rectangular 
equation in the hyperbola’s standard form. To do this, we can start with the initial equation. 

 TRY IT #5 Rewrite the polar equation  in Cartesian form. 

EXAMPLE 11 

Rewriting a Polar Equation in Cartesian Form 
Rewrite the polar equation  in Cartesian form. 

Solution 

This equation can also be written as 



912     10 • Further Applications of Trigonometry

 MEDIA 

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with polar coordinates. 

Introduction to Polar Coordinates (https://openstax.org/l/intropolar) 
Comparing Polar and Rectangular Coordinates (https://openstax.org/l/polarrect) 

 10.3 SECTION EXERCISES 
Verbal 

1 . How are polar coordinates  2 . How are the polar axes  3 . Explain how polar 
different from rectangular different from the x- and coordinates are graphed. 
coordinates? y-axes of the Cartesian 

plane? 
4 . How are the points  5 . Explain why the points 

and  related?  and  are 
the same. 

Algebraic 

For the following exercises, convert the given polar coordinates to Cartesian coordinates. Remember to consider the 
quadrant in which the given point is located when determining  for the point. 

6 .  7 .  8 . 

9 .  10 . 

For the following exercises, convert the given Cartesian coordinates to polar coordinates with 
Remember to consider the quadrant in which the given point is located. 
11 .  12 .  13 . 
14 .  15 . 

For the following exercises, convert the given Cartesian equation to a polar equation. 

16 .  17 .  18 . 

19 .  20 .  21 . 

22 .  23 .  24 . 

25 .  26 .  27 . 

For the following exercises, convert the given polar equation to a Cartesian equation. Write in the standard form of a 
conic if possible, and identify the conic section represented. 

28 .  29 .  30 . 

31 .  32 .  33 . 

34 .  35 .  36 . 

37 .  38 .  39 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



10.3 • Polar Coordinates     913

Graphical 

For the following exercises, find the polar coordinates of the point. 
40 . 41 . 42 . 

43 . 44 . 

For the following exercises, plot the points. 

45 . 46 .  47 . 

48 .  49 . 50 . 

51 . 52 .  53 . 

54 . 

For the following exercises, convert the equation from rectangular to polar form and graph on the polar axis. 

55 . 56 .  57 . 

58 .  59 . 60 . 

61 . 

For the following exercises, convert the equation from polar to rectangular form and graph on the rectangular plane. 

62 .  63 . 64 . 

65 . 66 .  67 . 

68 . 



914     10 • Further Applications of Trigonometry

Technology 

69 . Use a graphing calculator  70 . Use a graphing calculator  71 . Use a graphing calculator 
to find the rectangular to find the rectangular to find the polar 
coordinates of coordinates of coordinates of  in 
Round to the nearest Round to the nearest degrees. Round to the 
thousandth. thousandth. nearest thousandth. 

72 . Use a graphing calculator  73 . Use a graphing calculator 
to find the polar to find the polar 
coordinates of  in coordinates of  in 
degrees. Round to the radians. Round to the 
nearest hundredth. nearest hundredth. 

Extensions 

74 . Describe the graph of  75 . Describe the graph of  76 . Describe the graph of 

77 . Describe the graph of  78 . What polar equations will 
give an oblique line? 

For the following exercise, graph the polar inequality. 
79 . 80 .  81 . 

82 .  83 . 84 . 

10.4 Polar Coordinates: Graphs 
Learning Objectives 
In this section you will: 

Test polar equations for symmetry. 
Graph polar equations by plotting points. 

The planets move through space in elliptical, periodic orbits about the sun, as shown in Figure 1. They are in constant 
motion, so fixing an exact position of any planet is valid only for a moment. In other words, we can fix only a planet’s 
instantaneous position. This is one application of polar coordinates, represented as  We interpret  as the distance 
from the center of the sun and  as the planet’s angular bearing, or its direction from the center of the sun. In this 
section, we will focus on the polar system and the graphs that are generated directly from polar coordinates. 

Figure 1 Planets follow elliptical paths as they orbit around the Sun. (credit: modification of work by NASA/JPL-Caltech) 

Access for free at openstax.org



10.4 • Polar Coordinates: Graphs     915

Testing Polar Equations for Symmetry 
Just as a rectangular equation such as  describes the relationship between  and  on a Cartesian grid, a polar 
equation describes a relationship between  and  on a polar grid. Recall that the coordinate pair  indicates that we 
move counterclockwise from the polar axis (positive x-axis) by an angle of  and extend a ray from the pole (origin) 
units in the direction of  All points that satisfy the polar equation are on the graph. 
Symmetry is a property that helps us recognize and plot the graph of any equation. If an equation has a graph that is 
symmetric with respect to an axis, it means that if we folded the graph in half over that axis, the portion of the graph on 
one side would coincide with the portion on the other side. By performing three tests, we will see how to apply the 
properties of symmetry to polar equations. Further, we will use symmetry (in addition to plotting key points, zeros, and 
maximums of  to determine the graph of a polar equation. 
In the first test, we consider symmetry with respect to the line  (y-axis). We replace  with  to determine 
if the new equation is equivalent to the original equation. For example, suppose we are given the equation 

This equation exhibits symmetry with respect to the line 

In the second test, we consider symmetry with respect to the polar axis ( -axis). We replace  with  or 
 to determine equivalency between the tested equation and the original. For example, suppose we are given 

the equation 

The graph of this equation exhibits symmetry with respect to the polar axis. 
In the third test, we consider symmetry with respect to the pole (origin). We replace  with  to determine if the 
tested equation is equivalent to the original equation. For example, suppose we are given the equation 

The equation has failed the symmetry test, but that does not mean that it is not symmetric with respect to the pole. 
Passing one or more of the symmetry tests verifies that symmetry will be exhibited in a graph. However, failing the 
symmetry tests does not necessarily indicate that a graph will not be symmetric about the line  the polar axis, or 
the pole. In these instances, we can confirm that symmetry exists by plotting reflecting points across the apparent axis 
of symmetry or the pole. Testing for symmetry is a technique that simplifies the graphing of polar equations, but its 
application is not perfect. 

Symmetry Tests 

A polar equation describes a curve on the polar grid. The graph of a polar equation can be evaluated for three types 
of symmetry, as shown in Figure 2. 



916     10 • Further Applications of Trigonometry

Figure 2 (a) A graph is symmetric with respect to the line  (y-axis) if replacing  with  yields an 
equivalent equation. (b) A graph is symmetric with respect to the polar axis (x-axis) if replacing  with  or 

 yields an equivalent equation. (c) A graph is symmetric with respect to the pole (origin) if replacing 
with  yields an equivalent equation. 

...
HOW TO 

Given a polar equation, test for symmetry. 

1. Substitute the appropriate combination of components for   for  symmetry;  for polar 
axis symmetry; and  for symmetry with respect to the pole. 

2. If the resulting equations are equivalent in one or more of the tests, the graph produces the expected symmetry. 

EXAMPLE 1 

Testing a Polar Equation for Symmetry 
Test the equation  for symmetry. 

Solution 
Test for each of the three types of symmetry. 

1) Replacing  with  yields the same result. Thus, the graph 
is symmetric with respect to the line 

2) Replacing  with  does not yield the same equation. Therefore, 
the graph fails the test and may or may not be symmetric with respect 

to the polar axis. 

3) Replacing  with  changes the equation and fails the test. The 
graph may or may not be symmetric with respect to the pole. 

Table 1 

Access for free at openstax.org



10.4 • Polar Coordinates: Graphs     917

Analysis 
Using a graphing calculator, we can see that the equation  is a circle centered at  with radius  and is 
indeed symmetric to the line  We can also see that the graph is not symmetric with the polar axis or the pole. See 
Figure 3. 

Figure 3 

 TRY IT #1 Test the equation for symmetry: 

Graphing Polar Equations by Plotting Points 
To graph in the rectangular coordinate system we construct a table of  and  values. To graph in the polar coordinate 
system we construct a table of  and  values. We enter values of  into a polar equation and calculate  However, using 
the properties of symmetry and finding key values of  and  means fewer calculations will be needed. 

Finding Zeros and Maxima 
To find the zeros of a polar equation, we solve for the values of  that result in  Recall that, to find the zeros of 
polynomial functions, we set the equation equal to zero and then solve for  We use the same process for polar 
equations. Set  and solve for 
For many of the forms we will encounter, the maximum value of a polar equation is found by substituting those values of 

 into the equation that result in the maximum value of the trigonometric functions. Consider  the maximum 
distance between the curve and the pole is 5 units. The maximum value of the cosine function is 1 when  so our 
polar equation is  and the value  will yield the maximum 
Similarly, the maximum value of the sine function is 1 when  and if our polar equation is  the value 

 will yield the maximum  We may find additional information by calculating values of  when  These 
points would be polar axis intercepts, which may be helpful in drawing the graph and identifying the curve of a polar 
equation. 

EXAMPLE 2 

Finding Zeros and Maximum Values for a Polar Equation 
Using the equation in Example 1, find the zeros and maximum  and, if necessary, the polar axis intercepts of 

Solution 
To find the zeros, set  equal to zero and solve for 



918     10 • Further Applications of Trigonometry

Substitute any one of the  values into the equation. We will use 

The points  and  are the zeros of the equation. They all coincide, so only one point is visible on the graph. 
This point is also the only polar axis intercept. 
To find the maximum value of the equation, look at the maximum value of the trigonometric function  which 
occurs when  resulting in  Substitute  for 

Analysis 
The point  will be the maximum value on the graph. Let’s plot a few more points to verify the graph of a circle. See 
Table 2 and Figure 4. 

0 

Table 2 

Access for free at openstax.org



10.4 • Polar Coordinates: Graphs     919

Figure 4 

 TRY IT #2 Without converting to Cartesian coordinates, test the given equation for symmetry and find the 
zeros and maximum values of  

Investigating Circles 
Now we have seen the equation of a circle in the polar coordinate system. In the last two examples, the same equation 
was used to illustrate the properties of symmetry and demonstrate how to find the zeros, maximum values, and plotted 
points that produced the graphs. However, the circle is only one of many shapes in the set of polar curves. 
There are five classic polar curves: cardioids, limaҫons, lemniscates, rose curves, and Archimedes’ spirals. We will 
briefly touch on the polar formulas for the circle before moving on to the classic curves and their variations. 

Formulas for the Equation of a Circle 

Some of the formulas that produce the graph of a circle in polar coordinates are given by  and 
where  is the diameter of the circle or the distance from the pole to the farthest point on the circumference. The 
radius is  or one-half the diameter. For    the center is  For  the center is 
Figure 5 shows the graphs of these four circles. 

Figure 5 

EXAMPLE 3 

Sketching the Graph of a Polar Equation for a Circle 
Sketch the graph of 

Solution 
First, testing the equation for symmetry, we find that the graph is symmetric about the polar axis. Next, we find the zeros 



920     10 • Further Applications of Trigonometry

and maximum  for  First, set  and solve for . Thus, a zero occurs at  A key point to plot 
is ​ ​
To find the maximum value of  note that the maximum value of the cosine function is 1 when  Substitute 

 into the equation: 

The maximum value of the equation is 4. A key point to plot is 
As  is symmetric with respect to the polar axis, we only need to calculate r-values for  over the interval  
Points in the upper quadrant can then be reflected to the lower quadrant. Make a table of values similar to Table 3. The 
graph is shown in Figure 6. 

0 

4 3.46 2.83 2 0 −2 −2.83 −3.46 −4 

Table 3 

Figure 6 

Investigating Cardioids 
While translating from polar coordinates to Cartesian coordinates may seem simpler in some instances, graphing the 
classic curves is actually less complicated in the polar system. The next curve is called a cardioid, as it resembles a heart. 
This shape is often included with the family of curves called limaçons, but here we will discuss the cardioid on its own. 

Formulas for a Cardioid 

The formulas that produce the graphs of a cardioid are given by  and  where 
 and  The cardioid graph passes through the pole, as we can see in Figure 7. 

Access for free at openstax.org



10.4 • Polar Coordinates: Graphs     921

Figure 7 

...
HOW TO 

Given the polar equation of a cardioid, sketch its graph. 

1. Check equation for the three types of symmetry. 
2. Find the zeros. Set 
3. Find the maximum value of the equation according to the maximum value of the trigonometric expression. 
4. Make a table of values for  and 
5. Plot the points and sketch the graph. 

EXAMPLE 4 

Sketching the Graph of a Cardioid 
Sketch the graph of 

Solution 
First, testing the equation for symmetry, we find that the graph of this equation will be symmetric about the polar axis. 
Next, we find the zeros and maximums. Setting  we have  The zero of the equation is located at 
The graph passes through this point. 
The maximum value of  occurs when  is a maximum, which is when  or when 
Substitute  into the equation, and solve for 

The point  is the maximum value on the graph. 
We found that the polar equation is symmetric with respect to the polar axis, but as it extends to all four quadrants, we 
need to plot values over the interval  The upper portion of the graph is then reflected over the polar axis. Next, we 
make a table of values, as in Table 4, and then we plot the points and draw the graph. See Figure 8. 

4 3.41 2 1 0 

Table 4 



922     10 • Further Applications of Trigonometry

Figure 8 

Investigating Limaçons 
The word limaçon is Old French for “snail,” a name that describes the shape of the graph. As mentioned earlier, the 
cardioid is a member of the limaçon family, and we can see the similarities in the graphs. The other images in this 
category include the one-loop limaçon and the two-loop (or inner-loop) limaçon. One-loop limaçons are sometimes 
referred to as dimpled limaçons when  and convex limaçons when 

Formulas for One-Loop Limaçons 

The formulas that produce the graph of a dimpled one-loop limaçon are given by  and 
where   All four graphs are shown in Figure 9. 

Figure 9 Dimpled limaçons 

...
HOW TO 

Given a polar equation for a one-loop limaçon, sketch the graph. 

1. Test the equation for symmetry. Remember that failing a symmetry test does not mean that the shape will not 
exhibit symmetry. Often the symmetry may reveal itself when the points are plotted. 

2. Find the zeros. 
3. Find the maximum values according to the trigonometric expression. 
4. Make a table. 
5. Plot the points and sketch the graph. 

Access for free at openstax.org



10.4 • Polar Coordinates: Graphs     923

EXAMPLE 5 

Sketching the Graph of a One-Loop Limaçon 
Graph the equation 

Solution 
First, testing the equation for symmetry, we find that it fails all three symmetry tests, meaning that the graph may or 
may not exhibit symmetry, so we cannot use the symmetry to help us graph it. However, this equation has a graph that 
clearly displays symmetry with respect to the line  yet it fails all the three symmetry tests. A graphing calculator 
will immediately illustrate the graph’s reflective quality. 
Next, we find the zeros and maximum, and plot the reflecting points to verify any symmetry. Setting  results in 
being undefined. What does this mean? How could  be undefined? The angle  is undefined for any value of 
Therefore,  is undefined because there is no value of  for which  Consequently, the graph does not pass 
through the pole. Perhaps the graph does cross the polar axis, but not at the pole. We can investigate other intercepts by 
calculating  when 

So, there is at least one polar axis intercept at 
Next, as the maximum value of the sine function is 1 when  we will substitute  into the equation and solve 
for  Thus, 
Make a table of the coordinates similar to Table 5. 

4 2.5 1.4 1 1.4 2.5 4 5.5 6.6 7 6.6 5.5 4 

Table 5 

The graph is shown in Figure 10. 

Figure 10 One-loop limaçon 

Analysis 
This is an example of a curve for which making a table of values is critical to producing an accurate graph. The symmetry 
tests fail; the zero is undefined. While it may be apparent that an equation involving  is likely symmetric with 
respect to the line  evaluating more points helps to verify that the graph is correct. 



924     10 • Further Applications of Trigonometry

 TRY IT #3 Sketch the graph of 

Another type of limaçon, the inner-loop limaçon, is named for the loop formed inside the general limaçon shape. It was 
discovered by the German artist Albrecht Dürer(1471-1528), who revealed a method for drawing the inner-loop limaçon 
in his 1525 book Underweysung der Messing. A century later, the father of mathematician Blaise Pascal, Étienne 
Pascal(1588-1651), rediscovered it. 

Formulas for Inner-Loop Limaçons 

The formulas that generate the inner-loop limaçons are given by  and  where 
 and  The graph of the inner-loop limaçon passes through the pole twice: once for the outer loop, and 

once for the inner loop. See Figure 11 for the graphs. 

Figure 11 

EXAMPLE 6 

Sketching the Graph of an Inner-Loop Limaçon 
Sketch the graph of 

Solution 
Testing for symmetry, we find that the graph of the equation is symmetric about the polar axis. Next, finding the zeros 
reveals that when   The maximum  is found when  or when  Thus, the maximum is 
found at the point (7, 0). 
Even though we have found symmetry, the zero, and the maximum, plotting more points will help to define the shape, 
and then a pattern will emerge. 
See Table 6. 

7 6.3 4.5 2 −0.5 −2.3 −3 −2.3 −0.5 2 4.5 6.3 7 

Table 6 

As expected, the values begin to repeat after  The graph is shown in Figure 12. 

Access for free at openstax.org



10.4 • Polar Coordinates: Graphs     925

Figure 12 Inner-loop limaçon 

Investigating Lemniscates 
The lemniscate is a polar curve resembling the infinity symbol ∞  or a figure 8. Centered at the pole, a lemniscate is 
symmetrical by definition. 

Formulas for Lemniscates 

The formulas that generate the graph of a lemniscate are given by  and  where 
The formula  is symmetric with respect to the pole. The formula  is symmetric with 
respect to the pole, the line  and the polar axis. See Figure 13 for the graphs. 

Figure 13 

EXAMPLE 7 

Sketching the Graph of a Lemniscate 
Sketch the graph of 

Solution 
The equation exhibits symmetry with respect to the line  the polar axis, and the pole. 

Let’s find the zeros. It should be routine by now, but we will approach this equation a little differently by making the 
substitution 



926     10 • Further Applications of Trigonometry

So, the point  is a zero of the equation. 

Now let’s find the maximum value. Since the maximum of  when  the maximum  when 
 Thus, 

We have a maximum at (2, 0). Since this graph is symmetric with respect to the pole, the line  and the polar axis, 
we only need to plot points in the first quadrant. 
Make a table similar to Table 7. 

0 

0 

Table 7 

Plot the points on the graph, such as the one shown in Figure 14. 

Figure 14 Lemniscate 

Analysis 
Making a substitution such as  is a common practice in mathematics because it can make calculations simpler. 
However, we must not forget to replace the substitution term with the original term at the end, and then solve for the 
unknown. 
Some of the points on this graph may not show up using the Trace function on the TI-84 graphing calculator, and the 
calculator table may show an error for these same points of  This is because there are no real square roots for these 
values of  In other words, the corresponding r-values of  are complex numbers because there is a negative 
number under the radical. 

Investigating Rose Curves 
The next type of polar equation produces a petal-like shape called a rose curve. Although the graphs look complex, a 
simple polar equation generates the pattern. 

Access for free at openstax.org



10.4 • Polar Coordinates: Graphs     927

Rose Curves 

The formulas that generate the graph of a rose curve are given by  and  where  If  is 
even, the curve has  petals. If  is odd, the curve has  petals. See Figure 15. 

Figure 15 

EXAMPLE 8 

Sketching the Graph of a Rose Curve (n Even) 
Sketch the graph of 

Solution 
Testing for symmetry, we find again that the symmetry tests do not tell the whole story. The graph is not only symmetric 
with respect to the polar axis, but also with respect to the line  and the pole. 

Now we will find the zeros. First make the substitution 

The zero is  The point  is on the curve. 

Next, we find the maximum  We know that the maximum value of  when  Thus, 

The point  is on the curve. 
The graph of the rose curve has unique properties, which are revealed in Table 8. 

0 

2 0 −2 0 2 0 −2 

Table 8 



928     10 • Further Applications of Trigonometry

As  when  it makes sense to divide values in the table by  units. A definite pattern emerges. Look at the 
range of r-values: 2, 0, −2, 0, 2, 0, −2, and so on. This represents the development of the curve one petal at a time. 
Starting at  each petal extends out a distance of  and then turns back to zero  times for a total of eight 
petals. See the graph in Figure 16. 

Figure 16 Rose curve,  even 

Analysis 
When these curves are drawn, it is best to plot the points in order, as in the Table 8. This allows us to see how the graph 
hits a maximum (the tip of a petal), loops back crossing the pole, hits the opposite maximum, and loops back to the pole. 
The action is continuous until all the petals are drawn. 

 TRY IT #4 Sketch the graph of 

EXAMPLE 9 

Sketching the Graph of a Rose Curve (n Odd) 
Sketch the graph of 

Solution 
The graph of the equation shows symmetry with respect to the line  Next, find the zeros and maximum. We will 
want to make the substitution 

The maximum value is calculated at the angle where  is a maximum. Therefore, 

Thus, the maximum value of the polar equation is 2. This is the length of each petal. As the curve for  odd yields the 
same number of petals as  there will be five petals on the graph. See Figure 17. 

Access for free at openstax.org



10.4 • Polar Coordinates: Graphs     929

Figure 17 Rose curve,  odd 
Create a table of values similar to Table 9. 

0 

0 1 −1.73 2 −1.73 1 0 

Table 9 

 TRY IT #5 Sketch the graph of 

Investigating the Archimedes’ Spiral 
The final polar equation we will discuss is the Archimedes’ spiral, named for its discoverer, the Greek mathematician 
Archimedes (c. 287 BCE-c. 212 BCE), who is credited with numerous discoveries in the fields of geometry and mechanics. 

Archimedes’ Spiral 

The formula that generates the graph of the Archimedes’ spiral is given by  for  As  increases, 
increases at a constant rate in an ever-widening, never-ending, spiraling path. See Figure 18. 

Figure 18 

...
HOW TO 

Given an Archimedes’ spiral over  sketch the graph. 



930     10 • Further Applications of Trigonometry

1. Make a table of values for  and  over the given domain. 
2. Plot the points and sketch the graph. 

EXAMPLE 10 

Sketching the Graph of an Archimedes’ Spiral 
Sketch the graph of  over 

Solution 
As  is equal to  the plot of the Archimedes’ spiral begins at the pole at the point (0, 0). While the graph hints of 
symmetry, there is no formal symmetry with regard to passing the symmetry tests. Further, there is no maximum value, 
unless the domain is restricted. 
Create a table such as Table 10. 

0.785 1.57 3.14 4.71 5.50 6.28 

Table 10 

Notice that the r-values are just the decimal form of the angle measured in radians. We can see them on a graph in 
Figure 19. 

Figure 19 Archimedes’ spiral 

Analysis 
The domain of this polar curve is  In general, however, the domain of this function is ∞ ∞  Graphing the 
equation of the Archimedes’ spiral is rather simple, although the image makes it seem like it would be complex. 

 TRY IT #6 Sketch the graph of  over the interval 

Summary of Curves 
We have explored a number of seemingly complex polar curves in this section. Figure 20 and Figure 21 summarize the 
graphs and equations for each of these curves. 

Access for free at openstax.org



10.4 • Polar Coordinates: Graphs     931

Figure 20 

Figure 21 

 MEDIA 

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with graphs of polar coordinates. 

Graphing Polar Equations Part 1 (https://openstax.org/l/polargraph1) 
Graphing Polar Equations Part 2 (https://openstax.org/l/polargraph2) 
Animation: The Graphs of Polar Equations (https://openstax.org/l/polaranim) 
Graphing Polar Equations on the TI-84 (https://openstax.org/l/polarTI84) 

 10.4 SECTION EXERCISES 
Verbal 

1 . Describe the three types of  2 . Which of the three types of  3 . What are the steps to follow 
symmetry in polar graphs, symmetries for polar graphs when graphing polar 
and compare them to the correspond to the equations? 
symmetry of the Cartesian symmetries with respect to 
plane. the x-axis, y-axis, and origin? 

4 . Describe the shapes of the  5 . What part of the equation 
graphs of cardioids, determines the shape of the 
limaçons, and lemniscates. graph of a polar equation? 



932     10 • Further Applications of Trigonometry

Graphical 

For the following exercises, test the equation for symmetry. 
6 .  7 .  8 . 
9 .  10 .  11 . 

12 .  13 .  14 . 

15 . 

For the following exercises, graph the polar equation. Identify the name of the shape. 
16 .  17 . 18 . 
19 .  20 .  21 . 
22 .  23 . 24 . 
25 .  26 .  27 . 
28 .  29 . 30 . 

31 .  32 .  33 . 

34 .  35 . 36 . 
37 . 38 .  39 . 
40 .  41 . 42 . 
43 . 

Technology 

For the following exercises, use a graphing calculator to sketch the graph of the polar equation. 

44 .  45 . 46 .  a cissoid 

47 . , a 48 .  49 . 
hippopede 

50 .  51 . 52 . 
53 . 

For the following exercises, use a graphing utility to graph each pair of polar equations on a domain of  and then 
explain the differences shown in the graphs. 
54 .  55 .  56 . 

57 .  58 .  59 . On a graphing utility, 
graph  on , 

, , , , , and 
,  Describe the 

effect of increasing the 
width of the domain. 

Access for free at openstax.org



10.5 • Polar Form of Complex Numbers     933

60 . On a graphing utility,  61 . On a graphing utility,  62 . On a graphing utility, 
graph and sketch graph each polar equation. graph each polar equation. 

Explain the similarities and Explain the similarities and 
on differences you observe in differences you observe in 

the graphs. the graphs. 

63 . On a graphing utility, 
graph each polar equation. 
Explain the similarities and 
differences you observe in 
the graphs. 

Extensions 

For the following exercises, draw each polar equation on the same set of polar axes, and find the points of intersection. 
64 .  65 .  66 . 

67 .  68 .  69 . , 

70 .  71 .  72 . , 

10.5 Polar Form of Complex Numbers 
Learning Objectives 
In this section, you will: 

Plot complex numbers in the complex plane. 
Find the absolute value of a complex number. 
Write complex numbers in polar form. 
Convert a complex number from polar to rectangular form. 
Find products of complex numbers in polar form. 
Find quotients of complex numbers in polar form. 
Find powers of complex numbers in polar form. 
Find roots of complex numbers in polar form. 

“God made the integers; all else is the work of man.” This rather famous quote by nineteenth-century German 
mathematician Leopold Kronecker sets the stage for this section on the polar form of a complex number. Complex 
numbers were invented by people and represent over a thousand years of continuous investigation and struggle by 
mathematicians such as Pythagoras, Descartes, De Moivre, Euler, Gauss, and others. Complex numbers answered 
questions that for centuries had puzzled the greatest minds in science. 
We first encountered complex numbers in Complex Numbers. In this section, we will focus on the mechanics of working 
with complex numbers: translation of complex numbers from polar form to rectangular form and vice versa, 
interpretation of complex numbers in the scheme of applications, and application of De Moivre’s Theorem. 

Plotting Complex Numbers in the Complex Plane 
Plotting a complex number  is similar to plotting a real number, except that the horizontal axis represents the real 
part of the number,  and the vertical axis represents the imaginary part of the number, 



934     10 • Further Applications of Trigonometry

...
HOW TO 

Given a complex number  plot it in the complex plane. 

1. Label the horizontal axis as the real axis and the vertical axis as the imaginary axis. 
2. Plot the point in the complex plane by moving  units in the horizontal direction and  units in the vertical 

direction. 

EXAMPLE 1 

Plotting a Complex Number in the Complex Plane 
Plot the complex number  in the complex plane. 

Solution 
From the origin, move two units in the positive horizontal direction and three units in the negative vertical direction. See 
Figure 1. 

Figure 1 

 TRY IT #1 Plot the point  in the complex plane. 

Finding the Absolute Value of a Complex Number 
The first step toward working with a complex number in polar form is to find the absolute value. The absolute value of a 
complex number is the same as its magnitude, or  It measures the distance from the origin to a point in the plane. 
For example, the graph of  in Figure 2, shows 

Access for free at openstax.org



10.5 • Polar Form of Complex Numbers     935

Figure 2 

Absolute Value of a Complex Number 

Given  a complex number, the absolute value of  is defined as 

It is the distance from the origin to the point 

Notice that the absolute value of a real number gives the distance of the number from 0, while the absolute value of a 
complex number gives the distance of the number from the origin, 

EXAMPLE 2 

Finding the Absolute Value of a Complex Number with a Radical 
Find the absolute value of 

Solution 
Using the formula, we have 

See Figure 3. 



936     10 • Further Applications of Trigonometry

Figure 3 

 TRY IT #2 Find the absolute value of the complex number 

EXAMPLE 3 

Finding the Absolute Value of a Complex Number 
Given  find 

Solution 
Using the formula, we have 

The absolute value  is 5. See Figure 4. 

Figure 4 

 TRY IT #3 Given  find 

Writing Complex Numbers in Polar Form 
The polar form of a complex number expresses a number in terms of an angle  and its distance from the origin 

Access for free at openstax.org



10.5 • Polar Form of Complex Numbers     937

Given a complex number in rectangular form expressed as  we use the same conversion formulas as we do to 
write the number in trigonometric form: 

We review these relationships in Figure 5. 

Figure 5 
We use the term modulus to represent the absolute value of a complex number, or the distance from the origin to the 
point  The modulus, then, is the same as  the radius in polar form. We use  to indicate the angle of direction 
(just as with polar coordinates). Substituting, we have 

Polar Form of a Complex Number 

Writing a complex number in polar form involves the following conversion formulas: 

Making a direct substitution, we have 

where  is the modulus and  is the argument. We often use the abbreviation  to represent 

EXAMPLE 4 

Expressing a Complex Number Using Polar Coordinates 
Express the complex number  using polar coordinates. 

Solution 
On the complex plane, the number  is the same as  Writing it in polar form, we have to calculate  first. 



938     10 • Further Applications of Trigonometry

Next, we look at  If  and  then  In polar coordinates, the complex number  can be 
written as  or  See Figure 6. 

Figure 6 

 TRY IT #4 Express  as  in polar form. 

EXAMPLE 5 

Finding the Polar Form of a Complex Number 
Find the polar form of 

Solution 
First, find the value of 

Find the angle  using the formula: 

Thus, the solution is 

 TRY IT #5 Write  in polar form. 

Access for free at openstax.org



10.5 • Polar Form of Complex Numbers     939

Converting a Complex Number from Polar to Rectangular Form 
Converting a complex number from polar form to rectangular form is a matter of evaluating what is given and using the 
distributive property. In other words, given  first evaluate the trigonometric functions  and 

 Then, multiply through by 

EXAMPLE 6 

Converting from Polar to Rectangular Form 
Convert the polar form of the given complex number to rectangular form: 

Solution 
We begin by evaluating the trigonometric expressions. 

After substitution, the complex number is 

We apply the distributive property: 

The rectangular form of the given point in complex form is 

EXAMPLE 7 

Finding the Rectangular Form of a Complex Number 
Find the rectangular form of the complex number given  and  Assume the number is in the first 
quadrant. 

Solution 
If  and  we first confirm  We then find  and 

The rectangular form of the given number in complex form is 

 TRY IT #6 Convert the complex number to rectangular form: 

Finding Products of Complex Numbers in Polar Form 
Now that we can convert complex numbers to polar form we will learn how to perform operations on complex numbers 



940     10 • Further Applications of Trigonometry

in polar form. For the rest of this section, we will work with formulas developed by French mathematician Abraham De 
Moivre (1667-1754). These formulas have made working with products, quotients, powers, and roots of complex 
numbers much simpler than they appear. The rules are based on multiplying the moduli and adding the arguments. 

Products of Complex Numbers in Polar Form 

If  and  then the product of these numbers is given as: 

Notice that the product calls for multiplying the moduli and adding the angles. 

EXAMPLE 8 

Finding the Product of Two Complex Numbers in Polar Form 
Find the product of  given  and 

Solution 
Follow the formula 

Finding Quotients of Complex Numbers in Polar Form 
The quotient of two complex numbers in polar form is the quotient of the two moduli and the difference of the two 
arguments. 

Quotients of Complex Numbers in Polar Form 

If  and  then the quotient of these numbers is 

Notice that the moduli are divided, and the angles are subtracted. 

...
HOW TO 

Given two complex numbers in polar form, find the quotient. 

1. Divide 
2. Find 
3. Substitute the results into the formula:  Replace  with  and replace  with 
4. Calculate the new trigonometric expressions and multiply through by 

Access for free at openstax.org



10.5 • Polar Form of Complex Numbers     941

EXAMPLE 9 

Finding the Quotient of Two Complex Numbers 
Find the quotient of  and 

Solution 
Using the formula, we have 

 TRY IT #7 Find the product and the quotient of  and 

Finding Powers of Complex Numbers in Polar Form 
Finding powers of complex numbers is greatly simplified using De Moivre’s Theorem. It states that, for a positive 
integer  is found by raising the modulus to the  power and multiplying the argument by  It is the standard 
method used in modern mathematics. 

De Moivre’s Theorem 

If  is a complex number, then 

where  is a positive integer. 

EXAMPLE 10 

Evaluating an Expression Using De Moivre’s Theorem 
Evaluate the expression  using De Moivre’s Theorem. 

Solution 
Since De Moivre’s Theorem applies to complex numbers written in polar form, we must first write  in polar form. 
Let us find 

Then we find  Using the formula  gives 

Use De Moivre’s Theorem to evaluate the expression. 



942     10 • Further Applications of Trigonometry

Finding Roots of Complex Numbers in Polar Form 
To find the nth root of a complex number in polar form, we use the  Root Theorem or De Moivre’s Theorem and raise 
the complex number to a power with a rational exponent. There are several ways to represent a formula for finding 
roots of complex numbers in polar form. 

The nth Root Theorem 

To find the  root of a complex number in polar form, use the formula given as 

where  We add  to  in order to obtain the periodic roots. 

EXAMPLE 11 

Finding the nth Root of a Complex Number 
Evaluate the cube roots of 

Solution 
We have 

There will be three roots:  When  we have 

When  we have 

When  we have 

Remember to find the common denominator to simplify fractions in situations like this one. For  the angle 
simplification is 

Access for free at openstax.org



10.5 • Polar Form of Complex Numbers     943

 TRY IT #8 Find the four fourth roots of 

 MEDIA 

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with polar forms of complex numbers. 

The Product and Quotient of Complex Numbers in Trigonometric Form (https://openstax.org/l/prodquocomplex) 
De Moivre’s Theorem (https://openstax.org/l/demoivre) 

 10.5 SECTION EXERCISES 
Verbal 

1 . A complex number is  2 . What does the absolute  3 . How is a complex number 
Explain each part. value of a complex number converted to polar form? 

represent? 
4 . How do we find the product  5 . What is De Moivre’s 

of two complex numbers? Theorem and what is it used 
for? 

Algebraic 

For the following exercises, find the absolute value of the given complex number. 

6 . ​  7 . ​  8 . 

9 .  10 .  11 . 

For the following exercises, write the complex number in polar form. 

12 .  13 .  14 . ​
15 .  16 . 

For the following exercises, convert the complex number from polar to rectangular form. 

17 .  18 .  19 . 

20 .  21 .  22 . 

For the following exercises, find  in polar form. 

23 .  24 . 

25 .  26 . 

27 .  28 . 

For the following exercises, find  in polar form. 

29 .  30 . 



944     10 • Further Applications of Trigonometry

31 .  32 . 

33 .  34 . 

For the following exercises, find the powers of each complex number in polar form. 

35 . Find  when  36 . Find  when  37 . Find  when 

38 . Find  when  39 . Find  when  40 . Find  when 

For the following exercises, evaluate each root. 
41 . Evaluate the cube root of  42 . Evaluate the square root of  43 . Evaluate the cube root of 

when  when when 

44 . Evaluate the square root of  45 . Evaluate the square root of 
 when  when 

Graphical 

For the following exercises, plot the complex number in the complex plane. 
46 .  47 . 48 . 
49 . 50 .  51 . 
52 .  53 . 54 . 
55 . 

Technology 

For the following exercises, find all answers rounded to the nearest hundredth. 
56 . Use the rectangular to  57 . Use the rectangular to  58 . Use the rectangular to 

polar feature on the polar feature on the polar feature on the 
graphing calculator to graphing calculator to graphing calculator to 
change  to polar change  to polar change  to polar 
form. form. form. 

59 . Use the polar to  60 . Use the polar to  61 . Use the polar to 
rectangular feature on the rectangular feature on the rectangular feature on the 
graphing calculator to graphing calculator to graphing calculator to 
change  to change  to change  to 
rectangular form. rectangular form. rectangular form. 

10.6 Parametric Equations 
Learning Objectives 
In this section, you will: 

Parameterize a curve. 
Eliminate the parameter. 
Find a rectangular equation for a curve defined parametrically. 
Find parametric equations for curves defined by rectangular equations. 

Consider the path a moon follows as it orbits a planet, which simultaneously rotates around the sun, as seen in Figure 1. 
At any moment, the moon is located at a particular spot relative to the planet. But how do we write and solve the 
equation for the position of the moon when the distance from the planet, the speed of the moon’s orbit around the 
planet, and the speed of rotation around the sun are all unknowns? We can solve only for one variable at a time. 

Access for free at openstax.org



10.6 • Parametric Equations     945

Figure 1 
In this section, we will consider sets of equations given by  and  where  is the independent variable of time. We 
can use these parametric equations in a number of applications when we are looking for not only a particular position 
but also the direction of the movement. As we trace out successive values of  the orientation of the curve becomes 
clear. This is one of the primary advantages of using parametric equations: we are able to trace the movement of an 
object along a path according to time. We begin this section with a look at the basic components of parametric 
equations and what it means to parameterize a curve. Then we will learn how to eliminate the parameter, translate the 
equations of a curve defined parametrically into rectangular equations, and find the parametric equations for curves 
defined by rectangular equations. 

Parameterizing a Curve 
When an object moves along a curve—or curvilinear path—in a given direction and in a given amount of time, the 
position of the object in the plane is given by the x-coordinate and the y-coordinate. However, both  and  vary over 
time and so are functions of time. For this reason, we add another variable, the parameter, upon which both  and  are 
dependent functions. In the example in the section opener, the parameter is time,  The  position of the moon at time, 

 is represented as the function  and the  position of the moon at time,  is represented as the function 
Together,  and  are called parametric equations, and generate an ordered pair  Parametric equations 
primarily describe motion and direction. 

When we parameterize a curve, we are translating a single equation in two variables, such as  and    into an 
equivalent pair of equations in three variables,  and  One of the reasons we parameterize a curve is because the 
parametric equations yield more information: specifically, the direction of the object’s motion over time. 
When we graph parametric equations, we can observe the individual behaviors of  and of  There are a number of 
shapes that cannot be represented in the form  meaning that they are not functions. For example, consider the 
graph of a circle, given as  Solving for  gives  or two equations:  and 

 If we graph  and  together, the graph will not pass the vertical line test, as shown in Figure 2. 
Thus, the equation for the graph of a circle is not a function. 

Figure 2 



946     10 • Further Applications of Trigonometry

However, if we were to graph each equation on its own, each one would pass the vertical line test and therefore would 
represent a function. In some instances, the concept of breaking up the equation for a circle into two functions is similar 
to the concept of creating parametric equations, as we use two functions to produce a non-function. This will become 
clearer as we move forward. 

Parametric Equations 

Suppose  is a number on an interval,  The set of ordered pairs,   where  and  forms a 
plane curve based on the parameter  The equations  and  are the parametric equations. 

EXAMPLE 1 

Parameterizing a Curve 
Parameterize the curve  letting  Graph both equations. 

Solution 
If  then to find  we replace the variable  with the expression given in  In other words, 
Make a table of values similar to Table 1, and sketch the graph. 

Table 1 

See the graphs in Figure 3. It may be helpful to use the TRACE feature of a graphing calculator to see how the points are 
generated as  increases. 

Access for free at openstax.org



10.6 • Parametric Equations     947

Figure 3 (a) Parametric  (b) Rectangular 

Analysis 
The arrows indicate the direction in which the curve is generated. Notice the curve is identical to the curve of 

 TRY IT #1 Construct a table of values and plot the parametric equations: 

EXAMPLE 2 

Finding a Pair of Parametric Equations 
Find a pair of parametric equations that models the graph of  using the parameter  Plot some points 
and sketch the graph. 

Solution 
If  and we substitute  for  into the  equation, then  Our pair of parametric equations is 

To graph the equations, first we construct a table of values like that in Table 2. We can choose values around  from 
 to  The values in the  column will be the same as those in the  column because  Calculate 

values for the column 

Table 2 



948     10 • Further Applications of Trigonometry

The graph of  is a parabola facing downward, as shown in Figure 4. We have mapped the curve over the 
interval  shown as a solid line with arrows indicating the orientation of the curve according to  Orientation 
refers to the path traced along the curve in terms of increasing values of  As this parabola is symmetric with respect to 
the line  the values of  are reflected across the y-axis. 

Figure 4 

 TRY IT #2 Parameterize the curve given by 

EXAMPLE 3 

Finding Parametric Equations That Model Given Criteria 
An object travels at a steady rate along a straight path  to  in the same plane in four seconds. The 
coordinates are measured in meters. Find parametric equations for the position of the object. 

Solution 
The parametric equations are simple linear expressions, but we need to view this problem in a step-by-step fashion. The 
x-value of the object starts at  meters and goes to 3 meters. This means the distance x has changed by 8 meters in 4 
seconds, which is a rate of  or  We can write the x-coordinate as a linear function with respect to time as 

 In the linear function template  and 
Similarly, the y-value of the object starts at 3 and goes to  which is a change in the distance y of −4 meters in 4 
seconds, which is a rate of  or  We can also write the y-coordinate as the linear function 
Together, these are the parametric equations for the position of the object, where  and  are expressed in meters and 
represents time: 

Using these equations, we can build a table of values for  and  (see Table 3). In this example, we limited values of 
to non-negative numbers. In general, any value of  can be used. 

Table 3 

Access for free at openstax.org



10.6 • Parametric Equations     949

Table 3 

From this table, we can create three graphs, as shown in Figure 5. 

Figure 5 (a) A graph of  vs.  representing the horizontal position over time. (b) A graph of  vs.  representing the 
vertical position over time. (c) A graph of  vs.  representing the position of the object in the plane at time 

Analysis 
Again, we see that, in Figure 5(c), when the parameter represents time, we can indicate the movement of the object 
along the path with arrows. 

Eliminating the Parameter 
In many cases, we may have a pair of parametric equations but find that it is simpler to draw a curve if the equation 
involves only two variables, such as  and  Eliminating the parameter is a method that may make graphing some 
curves easier. However, if we are concerned with the mapping of the equation according to time, then it will be necessary 
to indicate the orientation of the curve as well. There are various methods for eliminating the parameter  from a set of 
parametric equations; not every method works for every type of equation. Here we will review the methods for the most 
common types of equations. 

Eliminating the Parameter from Polynomial, Exponential, and Logarithmic Equations 
For polynomial, exponential, or logarithmic equations expressed as two parametric equations, we choose the equation 
that is most easily manipulated and solve for  We substitute the resulting expression for  into the second equation. 
This gives one equation in  and 

EXAMPLE 4 

Eliminating the Parameter in Polynomials 
Given  and  eliminate the parameter, and write the parametric equations as a Cartesian 
equation. 

Solution 
We will begin with the equation for  because the linear equation is easier to solve for 

Next, substitute  for  in 



950     10 • Further Applications of Trigonometry

The Cartesian form is 

Analysis 
This is an equation for a parabola in which, in rectangular terms,  is dependent on  From the curve’s vertex at 
the graph sweeps out to the right. See Figure 6. In this section, we consider sets of equations given by the functions 
and  where  is the independent variable of time. Notice, both  and  are functions of time; so in general  is not a 
function of 

Figure 6 

 TRY IT #3 Given the equations below, eliminate the parameter and write as a rectangular equation for  as a 
function of 

EXAMPLE 5 

Eliminating the Parameter in Exponential Equations 
Eliminate the parameter and write as a Cartesian equation:  and 

Solution 
Isolate 

Substitute the expression into 

The Cartesian form is 

Access for free at openstax.org



10.6 • Parametric Equations     951

Analysis 
The graph of the parametric equation is shown in Figure 7(a). The domain is restricted to  The Cartesian equation, 

 is shown in Figure 7(b) and has only one restriction on the domain, 

Figure 7 

EXAMPLE 6 

Eliminating the Parameter in Logarithmic Equations 
Eliminate the parameter and write as a Cartesian equation:  and 

Solution 
Solve the first equation for 

Then, substitute the expression for  into the  equation. 

The Cartesian form is 

Analysis 
To be sure that the parametric equations are equivalent to the Cartesian equation, check the domains. The parametric 
equations restrict the domain on  to  we restrict the domain on  to  The domain for the 
parametric equation  is restricted to  we limit the domain on  to 

 TRY IT #4 Eliminate the parameter and write as a rectangular equation. 



952     10 • Further Applications of Trigonometry

Eliminating the Parameter from Trigonometric Equations 
Eliminating the parameter from trigonometric equations is a straightforward substitution. We can use a few of the 
familiar trigonometric identities and the Pythagorean Theorem. 
First, we use the identities: 

Solving for  and  we have 

Then, use the Pythagorean Theorem: 

Substituting gives 

EXAMPLE 7 

Eliminating the Parameter from a Pair of Trigonometric Parametric Equations 
Eliminate the parameter from the given pair of trigonometric equations where  and sketch the graph. 

Solution 
Solving for  and  we have 

Next, use the Pythagorean identity and make the substitutions. 

The graph for the equation is shown in Figure 8. 

Access for free at openstax.org



10.6 • Parametric Equations     953

Figure 8 

Analysis 
Applying the general equations for conic sections (introduced in Analytic Geometry, we can identify  as an 
ellipse centered at  Notice that when  the coordinates are  and when  the coordinates are 
This shows the orientation of the curve with increasing values of 

 TRY IT #5 Eliminate the parameter from the given pair of parametric equations and write as a Cartesian 
equation:  and 

Finding Cartesian Equations from Curves Defined Parametrically 
When we are given a set of parametric equations and need to find an equivalent Cartesian equation, we are essentially 
“eliminating the parameter.” However, there are various methods we can use to rewrite a set of parametric equations as a 
Cartesian equation. The simplest method is to set one equation equal to the parameter, such as  In this case, 

 can be any expression. For example, consider the following pair of equations. 

Rewriting this set of parametric equations is a matter of substituting  for  Thus, the Cartesian equation is 

EXAMPLE 8 

Finding a Cartesian Equation Using Alternate Methods 
Use two different methods to find the Cartesian equation equivalent to the given set of parametric equations. 

Solution 
Method 1. First, let’s solve the  equation for  Then we can substitute the result into the  equation. 

Now substitute the expression for  into the  equation. 



954     10 • Further Applications of Trigonometry

Method 2. Solve the  equation for  and substitute this expression in the  equation. 

Make the substitution and then solve for 

 TRY IT #6 Write the given parametric equations as a Cartesian equation:  and 

Finding Parametric Equations for Curves Defined by Rectangular Equations 
Although we have just shown that there is only one way to interpret a set of parametric equations as a rectangular 
equation, there are multiple ways to interpret a rectangular equation as a set of parametric equations. Any strategy we 
may use to find the parametric equations is valid if it produces equivalency. In other words, if we choose an expression 
to represent  and then substitute it into the  equation, and it produces the same graph over the same domain as the 
rectangular equation, then the set of parametric equations is valid. If the domain becomes restricted in the set of 
parametric equations, and the function does not allow the same values for  as the domain of the rectangular equation, 
then the graphs will be different. 

EXAMPLE 9 

Finding a Set of Parametric Equations for Curves Defined by Rectangular Equations 
Find a set of equivalent parametric equations for 

Solution 
An obvious choice would be to let  Then  But let’s try something more interesting. What if we 
let  Then we have 

The set of parametric equations is 

See Figure 9. 

Access for free at openstax.org



10.6 • Parametric Equations     955

Figure 9 

 MEDIA 

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with parametric equations. 

Introduction to Parametric Equations (https://openstax.org/l/introparametric) 
Converting Parametric Equations to Rectangular Form (https://openstax.org/l/convertpara) 

 10.6 SECTION EXERCISES 
Verbal 

1 . What is a system of  2 . Some examples of a third  3 . Explain how to eliminate a 
parametric equations? parameter are time, length, parameter given a set of 

speed, and scale. Explain parametric equations. 
when time is used as a 
parameter. 

4 . What is a benefit of writing a  5 . What is a benefit of using  6 . Why are there many sets of 
system of parametric parametric equations? parametric equations to 
equations as a Cartesian represent on Cartesian 
equation? function? 

Algebraic 

For the following exercises, eliminate the parameter  to rewrite the parametric equation as a Cartesian equation. 

7 .  8 .  9 . 

10 .  11 .  12 . 

13 .  14 .  15 . 

16 .  17 .  18 . 



956     10 • Further Applications of Trigonometry

19 .  20 .  21 . 

22 .  23 .  24 . 

25 . 

For the following exercises, rewrite the parametric equation as a Cartesian equation by building an  table. 

26 .  27 .  28 . 

29 . 

For the following exercises, parameterize (write parametric equations for) each Cartesian equation by setting  or 
by setting 

30 .  31 .  32 . 
33 . 

For the following exercises, parameterize (write parametric equations for) each Cartesian equation by using 
 and  Identify the curve. 

34 .  35 .  36 . 

37 .  38 . Parameterize the line from  39 . Parameterize the line from 
 to  so that  to  so that 

the line is at  at the line is at  at 
and at  at  and at  at 

40 . Parameterize the line from 41 . Parameterize the line from 
 to  so that the  to  so that the 

line is at  at line is at  at  and 
and at  at at  at 

Technology 

For the following exercises, use the table feature in the graphing calculator to determine whether the graphs intersect. 

42 .  43 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



10.7 • Parametric Equations: Graphs     957

For the following exercises, use a graphing calculator to complete the table of values for each set of parametric 
equations. 

44 . 45 . 46 . 

–1 1 -1 

0 2 0 

1 3 1 

2 

Extensions 

47 . Find two different sets of  48 . Find two different sets of  49 . Find two different sets of 
parametric equations for parametric equations for parametric equations for 

10.7 Parametric Equations: Graphs 
Learning Objectives 
In this section you will: 

Graph plane curves described by parametric equations by plotting points. 
Graph parametric equations. 

While not every fan (or team manager) appreciates it, baseball and many other sports have become dependent on 
analytics, which involve complex data recording and quantitative evaluation used to understand and predict behavior. 
The earliest influence of analytics was mostly statistical; more recently, physics and other sciences have come into play. 
Foremost among these is the focus on launch angle and exit velocity, which when at certain values can almost guarantee 
a home run. On the other hand, emphasis on launch angle and focusing on home runs rather than overall hitting results 
in far more outs. Consider the following situation: it is the bottom of the ninth inning, with two outs and two players on 
base. The home team is losing by two runs. The batter swings and hits the baseball at 140 feet per second and at an 
angle of approximately  to the horizontal. How far will the ball travel? Will it clear the fence for a game-winning home 
run? The outcome may depend partly on other factors (for example, the wind), but mathematicians can model the path 
of a projectile and predict approximately how far it will travel using parametric equations. In this section, we’ll discuss 
parametric equations and some common applications, such as projectile motion problems. 

Figure 1 Parametric equations can model the path of a projectile. (credit: Paul Kreher, Flickr) 



958     10 • Further Applications of Trigonometry

Graphing Parametric Equations by Plotting Points 
In lieu of a graphing calculator or a computer graphing program, plotting points to represent the graph of an equation is 
the standard method. As long as we are careful in calculating the values, point-plotting is highly dependable. 

...
HOW TO 

Given a pair of parametric equations, sketch a graph by plotting points. 

1. Construct a table with three columns: 
2. Evaluate  and  for values of  over the interval for which the functions are defined. 
3. Plot the resulting pairs 

EXAMPLE 1 

Sketching the Graph of a Pair of Parametric Equations by Plotting Points 
Sketch the graph of the parametric equations  

Solution 
Construct a table of values for   and  as in Table 1, and plot the points in a plane. 

Table 1 

The graph is a parabola with vertex at the point  opening to the right. See Figure 2. 

Access for free at openstax.org



10.7 • Parametric Equations: Graphs     959

Figure 2 

Analysis 
As values for  progress in a positive direction from 0 to 5, the plotted points trace out the top half of the parabola. As 
values of  become negative, they trace out the lower half of the parabola. There are no restrictions on the domain. The 
arrows indicate direction according to increasing values of  The graph does not represent a function, as it will fail the 
vertical line test. The graph is drawn in two parts: the positive values for  and the negative values for 

 TRY IT #1 Sketch the graph of the parametric equations   

EXAMPLE 2 

Sketching the Graph of Trigonometric Parametric Equations 
Construct a table of values for the given parametric equations and sketch the graph: 

Solution 
Construct a table like that in Table 2 using angle measure in radians as inputs for  and evaluating  and  Using angles 
with known sine and cosine values for  makes calculations easier. 

0 

Table 2 



960     10 • Further Applications of Trigonometry

Table 2 

Figure 3 shows the graph. 

Figure 3 
By the symmetry shown in the values of  and  we see that the parametric equations represent an ellipse. The ellipse is 
mapped in a counterclockwise direction as shown by the arrows indicating increasing  values. 

Analysis 
We have seen that parametric equations can be graphed by plotting points. However, a graphing calculator will save 
some time and reveal nuances in a graph that may be too tedious to discover using only hand calculations. 
Make sure to change the mode on the calculator to parametric (PAR). To confirm, the  window should show 

instead of 

 TRY IT #2 Graph the parametric equations:  

EXAMPLE 3 

Graphing Parametric Equations and Rectangular Form Together 
Graph the parametric equations  and  First, construct the graph using data points generated from 
the parametric form. Then graph the rectangular form of the equation. Compare the two graphs. 

Access for free at openstax.org



10.7 • Parametric Equations: Graphs     961

Solution 
Construct a table of values like that in Table 3. 

Table 3 

Plot the  values from the table. See Figure 4. 

Figure 4 
Next, translate the parametric equations to rectangular form. To do this, we solve for  in either  or  and then 
substitute the expression for  in the other equation. The result will be a function  if solving for  as a function of 
or  if solving for  as a function of 

Then, use the Pythagorean Theorem. 



962     10 • Further Applications of Trigonometry

Analysis 
In Figure 5, the data from the parametric equations and the rectangular equation are plotted together. The parametric 
equations are plotted in blue; the graph for the rectangular equation is drawn on top of the parametric in a dashed style 
colored red. Clearly, both forms produce the same graph. 

Figure 5 

EXAMPLE 4 

Graphing Parametric Equations and Rectangular Equations on the Coordinate System 
Graph the parametric equations  and   and the rectangular equivalent  on the same 
coordinate system. 

Solution 
Construct a table of values for the parametric equations, as we did in the previous example, and graph   on 
the same grid, as in Figure 6. 

Figure 6 

Analysis 
With the domain on  restricted, we only plot positive values of  The parametric data is graphed in blue and the graph 
of the rectangular equation is dashed in red. Once again, we see that the two forms overlap. 

 TRY IT #3 Sketch the graph of the parametric equations  along with the 
rectangular equation on the same grid. 

Access for free at openstax.org



10.7 • Parametric Equations: Graphs     963

Applications of Parametric Equations 
Many of the advantages of parametric equations become obvious when applied to solving real-world problems. 
Although rectangular equations in x and y give an overall picture of an object's path, they do not reveal the position of an 
object at a specific time. Parametric equations, however, illustrate how the values of x and y change depending on t, as 
the location of a moving object at a particular time. 
A common application of parametric equations is solving problems involving projectile motion. In this type of motion, an 
object is propelled forward in an upward direction forming an angle of  to the horizontal, with an initial speed of 
and at a height  above the horizontal. 
The path of an object propelled at an inclination of  to the horizontal, with initial speed  and at a height  above the 
horizontal, is given by 

where  accounts for the effects of gravity and  is the initial height of the object. Depending on the units involved in the 
problem, use  or  The equation for  gives horizontal distance, and the equation for  gives the 
vertical distance. 

...
HOW TO 

Given a projectile motion problem, use parametric equations to solve. 

1. The horizontal distance is given by  Substitute the initial speed of the object for 
2. The expression  indicates the angle at which the object is propelled. Substitute that angle in degrees for 

3. The vertical distance is given by the formula  The term  represents the effect 
of gravity. Depending on units involved, use  or  Again, substitute the initial speed for 

 and the height at which the object was propelled for 
4. Proceed by calculating each term to solve for 

EXAMPLE 5 

Finding the Parametric Equations to Describe the Motion of a Baseball 
Solve the problem presented at the beginning of this section. Does the batter hit the game-winning home run? Assume 
that the ball is hit with an initial velocity of 140 feet per second at an angle of  to the horizontal, making contact 3 feet 
above the ground. 

ⓐ  Find the parametric equations to model the path of the baseball.  ⓑ  Where is the ball after 2 seconds? 
ⓒ  How long is the ball in the air?  ⓓ  Is it a home run? 

Solution 
ⓐ 
Use the formulas to set up the equations. The horizontal position is found using the parametric equation for  Thus, 

The vertical position is found using the parametric equation for  Thus, 



964     10 • Further Applications of Trigonometry

ⓑ 
Substitute 2 into the equations to find the horizontal and vertical positions of the ball. 

After 2 seconds, the ball is 198 feet away from the batter’s box and 137 feet above the ground. 

ⓒ 
To calculate how long the ball is in the air, we have to find out when it will hit ground, or when  Thus, 

When  seconds, the ball has hit the ground. (The quadratic equation can be solved in various ways, but this 
problem was solved using a computer math program.) 

ⓓ 
We cannot confirm that the hit was a home run without considering the size of the outfield, which varies from field to 
field. However, for simplicity’s sake, let’s assume that the outfield wall is 400 feet from home plate in the deepest part 
of the park. Let’s also assume that the wall is 10 feet high. In order to determine whether the ball clears the wall, we 
need to calculate how high the ball is when x = 400 feet. So we will set x = 400, solve for  and input  into 

The ball is 141.8 feet in the air when it soars out of the ballpark. It was indeed a home run. See Figure 7. 

Figure 7 

 MEDIA 

Access the following online resource for additional instruction and practice with graphs of parametric equations. 

Graphing Parametric Equations on the TI-84 (https://openstax.org/l/graphpara84) 

Access for free at openstax.org



10.7 • Parametric Equations: Graphs     965

 10.7 SECTION EXERCISES 
Verbal 

1 . What are two methods used  2 . What is one difference in  3 . Why are some graphs drawn 
to graph parametric point-plotting parametric with arrows? 
equations? equations compared to 

Cartesian equations? 
4 . Name a few common types  5 . Why are parametric graphs 

of graphs of parametric important in understanding 
equations. projectile motion? 

Graphical 

For the following exercises, graph each set of parametric equations by making a table of values. Include the orientation 
on the graph. 

6 . 7 . 

8 . 9 . 10 . 

11 . 

For the following exercises, sketch the curve and include the orientation. 

12 .  13 . 14 . 



966     10 • Further Applications of Trigonometry

15 . 16 . 17 . 

18 .  19 . 20 . 

21 . 22 . 

For the following exercises, graph the equation and include the orientation. Then, write the Cartesian equation. 

23 . 24 .  25 . 

26 .  27 . 

For the following exercises, graph the equation and include the orientation. 

28 .  29 . 30.  

31 .  32 .   33 .  

For the following exercises, use the parametric equations for integers a and b: 

34 . Graph on the domain  35 . Graph on the domain 36 . Graph on the domain 
  where  and   where  and   where  and 

  and include the , and include the , and include the 
orientation. orientation. orientation. 

37 . Graph on the domain 38 . If  is 1 more than   39 . Describe the graph if 
  where  and describe the effect the  and 

, and include the values of  and  have on 
orientation. the graph of the 

parametric equations. 
40 . What happens if  is 1  41 . If the parametric equations 

more than  Describe the  and 
graph. have the graph of a 

horizontal parabola 
opening to the right, what 
would change the direction 
of the curve? 

For the following exercises, describe the graph of the set of parametric equations. 

42 .  and  is  43 .  and  is linear  44 .  and  is 
linear linear 

45 . Write the parametric  46 . Write the parametric 
equations of a circle with equations of an ellipse with 
center  radius 5, and center  major axis of 
a counterclockwise length 10, minor axis of 
orientation. length 6, and a 

counterclockwise 
orientation. 

Access for free at openstax.org



10.7 • Parametric Equations: Graphs     967

For the following exercises, use a graphing utility to graph on the window  by  on the domain  for the 
following values of  and , and include the orientation. 

47 . 48 .  49 . 
50 .  51 . 52 . 

Technology 

For the following exercises, look at the graphs that were created by parametric equations of the form 

Use the parametric mode on the graphing calculator to find the values of  and  to achieve each graph. 
53 . 

54 . 



968     10 • Further Applications of Trigonometry

55 . 

56 . 

For the following exercises, use a graphing utility to graph the given parametric equations. 

a. 

b. 

c. 

57 . Graph all three sets of 58 . Graph all three sets of  59 . Graph all three sets of 
parametric equations on parametric equations on parametric equations on 
the domain  the domain the domain 

60 . The graph of each set of  61 . Explain the effect on the  62 . Explain the effect on the 
parametric equations graph of the parametric graph of the parametric 
appears to “creep” along equation when we equation when we 
one of the axes. What switched  and . changed the domain. 
controls which axis the 
graph creeps along? 

Access for free at openstax.org



10.8 • Vectors     969

Extensions 

63 . An object is thrown in the air with vertical velocity  64 . A skateboarder riding on a level surface at a 
of 20 ft/s and horizontal velocity of 15 ft/s. The constant speed of 9 ft/s throws a ball in the air, the 
object’s height can be described by the equation height of which can be described by the equation 

, while the object moves  Write parametric 
horizontally with constant velocity 15 ft/s. Write equations for the ball’s position, and then 
parametric equations for the object’s position, and eliminate time to write height as a function of 
then eliminate time to write height as a function horizontal position. 
of horizontal position. 

For the following exercises, use this scenario: A dart is thrown upward with an initial velocity of 64 ft/s at an angle of 
elevation of 52°. Consider the position of the dart at any time  Neglect air resistance. 
65 . Find parametric equations  66 . Find all possible values of  67 . When will the dart hit the 

that model the problem that represent the ground? 
situation. situation. 

68 . Find the maximum height  69 . At what time will the dart 
of the dart. reach maximum height? 

For the following exercises, look at the graphs of each of the four parametric equations. Although they look unusual and 
beautiful, they are so common that they have names, as indicated in each exercise. Use a graphing utility to graph each 
on the indicated domain. 

70 . An epicycloid:  on the  71 . A hypocycloid:  on the 

domain . domain . 

72 . A hypotrochoid:  on  73 . A rose:  on the domain 

the domain . . 

10.8 Vectors 
Learning Objectives 
In this section you will: 

View vectors geometrically. 
Find magnitude and direction. 
Perform vector addition and scalar multiplication. 
Find the component form of a vector. 
Find the unit vector in the direction of  . 
Perform operations with vectors in terms of    and  . 
Find the dot product of two vectors. 

An airplane is flying at an airspeed of 200 miles per hour headed on a SE bearing of 140°. A north wind (from north to 
south) is blowing at 16.2 miles per hour, as shown in Figure 1. What are the ground speed and actual bearing of the 
plane? 



970     10 • Further Applications of Trigonometry

Figure 1 
Ground speed refers to the speed of a plane relative to the ground. Airspeed refers to the speed a plane can travel 
relative to its surrounding air mass. These two quantities are not the same because of the effect of wind. In an earlier 
section, we used triangles to solve a similar problem involving the movement of boats. Later in this section, we will find 
the airplane’s groundspeed and bearing, while investigating another approach to problems of this type. First, however, 
let’s examine the basics of vectors. 

A Geometric View of Vectors 
A vector is a specific quantity drawn as a line segment with an arrowhead at one end. It has an initial point, where it 
begins, and a terminal point, where it ends. A vector is defined by its magnitude, or the length of the line, and its 
direction, indicated by an arrowhead at the terminal point. Thus, a vector is a directed line segment. There are various 
symbols that distinguish vectors from other quantities: 

• Lower case, boldfaced type, with or without an arrow on top such as     
• Given initial point  and terminal point  a vector can be represented as  The arrowhead on top is what 

indicates that it is not just a line, but a directed line segment. 
• Given an initial point of  and terminal point  a vector may be represented as 

This last symbol  has special significance. It is called the standard position. The position vector has an initial point 
 and a terminal point  To change any vector into the position vector, we think about the change in the 

x-coordinates and the change in the y-coordinates. Thus, if the initial point of a vector  is  and the terminal 
point is  then the position vector is found by calculating 

In Figure 2, we see the original vector  and the position vector 

Figure 2 

Properties of Vectors 

A vector is a directed line segment with an initial point and a terminal point. Vectors are identified by magnitude, or 

Access for free at openstax.org



10.8 • Vectors     971

the length of the line, and direction, represented by the arrowhead pointing toward the terminal point. The position 
vector has an initial point at  and is identified by its terminal point 

EXAMPLE 1 

Find the Position Vector 
Consider the vector whose initial point is  and terminal point is  Find the position vector. 

Solution 
The position vector is found by subtracting one x-coordinate from the other x-coordinate, and one y-coordinate from the 
other y-coordinate. Thus 

The position vector begins at  and terminates at  The graphs of both vectors are shown in Figure 3. 

Figure 3 
We see that the position vector is 

EXAMPLE 2 

Drawing a Vector with the Given Criteria and Its Equivalent Position Vector 
Find the position vector given that vector  has an initial point at  and a terminal point at  then graph both 
vectors in the same plane. 

Solution 
The position vector is found using the following calculation: 

Thus, the position vector begins at  and terminates at  See Figure 4. 



972     10 • Further Applications of Trigonometry

Figure 4 

 TRY IT #1 Draw a vector  that connects from the origin to the point 

Finding Magnitude and Direction 
To work with a vector, we need to be able to find its magnitude and its direction. We find its magnitude using the 
Pythagorean Theorem or the distance formula, and we find its direction using the inverse tangent function. 

Magnitude and Direction of a Vector 

Given a position vector   the magnitude is found by  The direction is equal to the angle 
formed with the x-axis, or with the y-axis, depending on the application. For a position vector, the direction is found by 

 as illustrated in Figure 5. 

Figure 5 

Two vectors v and u are considered equal if they have the same magnitude and the same direction. Additionally, if 
both vectors have the same position vector, they are equal. 

EXAMPLE 3 

Finding the Magnitude and Direction of a Vector 
Find the magnitude and direction of the vector with initial point  and terminal point  Draw the 
vector. 

Solution 
First, find the position vector. 

Access for free at openstax.org



10.8 • Vectors     973

We use the Pythagorean Theorem to find the magnitude. 

The direction is given as 

However, the angle terminates in the fourth quadrant, so we add 360° to obtain a positive angle. Thus, 
 See Figure 6. 

Figure 6 

EXAMPLE 4 

Showing That Two Vectors Are Equal 
Show that vector v with initial point at  and terminal point at  is equal to vector u with initial point at 

 and terminal point at  Draw the position vector on the same grid as v and u. Next, find the magnitude 
and direction of each vector. 

Solution 
As shown in Figure 7, draw the vector  starting at initial  and terminal point  Draw the vector  with initial 
point  and terminal point  Find the standard position for each. 
Next, find and sketch the position vector for v and u. We have 

Since the position vectors are the same, v and u are the same. 
An alternative way to check for vector equality is to show that the magnitude and direction are the same for both 
vectors. To show that the magnitudes are equal, use the Pythagorean Theorem. 



974     10 • Further Applications of Trigonometry

As the magnitudes are equal, we now need to verify the direction. Using the tangent function with the position vector 
gives 

However, we can see that the position vector terminates in the second quadrant, so we add  Thus, the direction is 

Figure 7 

Performing Vector Addition and Scalar Multiplication 
Now that we understand the properties of vectors, we can perform operations involving them. While it is convenient to 
think of the vector   as an arrow or directed line segment from the origin to the point  vectors can be 
situated anywhere in the plane. The sum of two vectors u and v, or vector addition, produces a third vector u + v, the 
resultant vector. 
To find u + v, we first draw the vector u, and from the terminal end of u, we drawn the vector v. In other words, we have 
the initial point of v meet the terminal end of u. This position corresponds to the notion that we move along the first 
vector and then, from its terminal point, we move along the second vector. The sum u + v is the resultant vector because 
it results from addition or subtraction of two vectors. The resultant vector travels directly from the beginning of u to the 
end of v in a straight path, as shown in Figure 8. 

Figure 8 
Vector subtraction is similar to vector addition. To find u − v, view it as u + (−v). Adding −v is reversing direction of v and 
adding it to the end of u. The new vector begins at the start of u and stops at the end point of −v. See Figure 9 for a 
visual that compares vector addition and vector subtraction using parallelograms. 

Access for free at openstax.org



10.8 • Vectors     975

Figure 9 

EXAMPLE 5 

Adding and Subtracting Vectors 
Given   and   find two new vectors u + v, and u − v. 

Solution 
To find the sum of two vectors, we add the components. Thus, 

See Figure 10(a). 
To find the difference of two vectors, add the negative components of  to  Thus, 

See Figure 10(b). 

Figure 10 (a) Sum of two vectors (b) Difference of two vectors 

Multiplying By a Scalar 
While adding and subtracting vectors gives us a new vector with a different magnitude and direction, the process of 
multiplying a vector by a scalar, a constant, changes only the magnitude of the vector or the length of the line. Scalar 
multiplication has no effect on the direction unless the scalar is negative, in which case the direction of the resulting 
vector is opposite the direction of the original vector. 

Scalar Multiplication 

Scalar multiplication involves the product of a vector and a scalar. Each component of the vector is multiplied by the 
scalar. Thus, to multiply   by , we have 

Only the magnitude changes, unless  is negative, and then the vector reverses direction. 



976     10 • Further Applications of Trigonometry

EXAMPLE 6 

Performing Scalar Multiplication 
Given vector   find 3v,   and −v. 

Solution 
See Figure 11 for a geometric interpretation. If   then 

Figure 11 

Analysis 
Notice that the vector 3v is three times the length of v,   is half the length of v, and –v is the same length of v, but in 
the opposite direction. 

 TRY IT #2 Find the scalar multiple 3  given  

EXAMPLE 7 

Using Vector Addition and Scalar Multiplication to Find a New Vector 
Given   and   find a new vector w = 3u + 2v. 

Solution 
First, we must multiply each vector by the scalar. 

Then, add the two together. 

Access for free at openstax.org



10.8 • Vectors     977

So,  

Finding Component Form 
In some applications involving vectors, it is helpful for us to be able to break a vector down into its components. Vectors 
are comprised of two components: the horizontal component is the  direction, and the vertical component is the 
direction. For example, we can see in the graph in Figure 12 that the position vector  comes from adding the 
vectors v1 and v2. We have v1 with initial point  and terminal point 

We also have v2 with initial point  and terminal point 

Therefore, the position vector is 

Using the Pythagorean Theorem, the magnitude of v1 is 2, and the magnitude of v2 is 3. To find the magnitude of v, use 
the formula with the position vector. 

The magnitude of v is  To find the direction, we use the tangent function 

Figure 12 

Thus, the magnitude of  is  and the direction is  off the horizontal. 



978     10 • Further Applications of Trigonometry

EXAMPLE 8 

Finding the Components of the Vector 
Find the components of the vector  with initial point  and terminal point 

Solution 
First find the standard position. 

See the illustration in Figure 13. 

Figure 13 
The horizontal component is   and the vertical component is  

Finding the Unit Vector in the Direction of v 
In addition to finding a vector’s components, it is also useful in solving problems to find a vector in the same direction as 
the given vector, but of magnitude 1. We call a vector with a magnitude of 1 a unit vector. We can then preserve the 
direction of the original vector while simplifying calculations. 
Unit vectors are defined in terms of components. The horizontal unit vector is written as   and is directed along 
the positive horizontal axis. The vertical unit vector is written as   and is directed along the positive vertical axis. 
See Figure 14. 

Figure 14 

The Unit Vectors 

If  is a nonzero vector, then  is a unit vector in the direction of  Any vector divided by its magnitude is a unit 
vector. Notice that magnitude is always a scalar, and dividing by a scalar is the same as multiplying by the reciprocal of 
the scalar. 

Access for free at openstax.org



10.8 • Vectors     979

EXAMPLE 9 

Finding the Unit Vector in the Direction of v 
Find a unit vector in the same direction as  

Solution 
First, we will find the magnitude. 

Then we divide each component by  which gives a unit vector in the same direction as v: 

or, in component form 

See Figure 15. 

Figure 15 

Verify that the magnitude of the unit vector equals 1. The magnitude of  is given as 

The vector u  i  j is the unit vector in the same direction as v 

Performing Operations with Vectors in Terms of i and j 
So far, we have investigated the basics of vectors: magnitude and direction, vector addition and subtraction, scalar 
multiplication, the components of vectors, and the representation of vectors geometrically. Now that we are familiar with 
the general strategies used in working with vectors, we will represent vectors in rectangular coordinates in terms of i 
and j. 



980     10 • Further Applications of Trigonometry

Vectors in the Rectangular Plane 

Given a vector  with initial point  and terminal point  v is written as 

The position vector from  to  where  and  is written as v = ai + bj. This vector 
sum is called a linear combination of the vectors i and j. 

The magnitude of v = ai + bj is given as  See Figure 16. 

Figure 16 

EXAMPLE 10 

Writing a Vector in Terms of i and j 
Given a vector  with initial point  and terminal point  write the vector in terms of  and 

Solution 
Begin by writing the general form of the vector. Then replace the coordinates with the given values. 

EXAMPLE 11 

Writing a Vector in Terms of i and j Using Initial and Terminal Points 
Given initial point  and terminal point  write the vector  in terms of  and 

Solution 
Begin by writing the general form of the vector. Then replace the coordinates with the given values. 

 TRY IT #3 Write the vector  with initial point  and terminal point  in terms of  and 

Performing Operations on Vectors in Terms of i and j 
When vectors are written in terms of  and  we can carry out addition, subtraction, and scalar multiplication by 
performing operations on corresponding components. 

Access for free at openstax.org



10.8 • Vectors     981

Adding and Subtracting Vectors in Rectangular Coordinates 

Given v = ai + bj and u = ci + dj, then 

EXAMPLE 12 

Finding the Sum of the Vectors 
Find the sum of  and 

Solution 
According to the formula, we have 

Calculating the Component Form of a Vector: Direction 
We have seen how to draw vectors according to their initial and terminal points and how to find the position vector. We 
have also examined notation for vectors drawn specifically in the Cartesian coordinate plane using  For any of 
these vectors, we can calculate the magnitude. Now, we want to combine the key points, and look further at the ideas of 
magnitude and direction. 
Calculating direction follows the same straightforward process we used for polar coordinates. We find the direction of 
the vector by finding the angle to the horizontal. We do this by using the basic trigonometric identities, but with 
replacing 

Vector Components in Terms of Magnitude and Direction 

Given a position vector  and a direction angle 

Thus,  and magnitude is expressed as 

EXAMPLE 13 

Writing a Vector in Component Form When It Is Given in Magnitude and Direction Form 
Given a vector with length 7 and an angle of 135°, write it in component form. 

Solution 
Using the conversion formulas  and  we find that 

This vector can be written as  or simplified as 



982     10 • Further Applications of Trigonometry

 TRY IT #4 A vector travels from the origin to the point  Write the vector in terms of magnitude and 
direction. 

Finding the Dot Product of Two Vectors 
As we discussed earlier in the section, scalar multiplication involves multiplying a vector by a scalar, and the result is a 
vector. As we have seen, multiplying a vector by a number is called scalar multiplication. If we multiply a vector by a 
vector, there are two possibilities: the dot product and the cross product. We will only examine the dot product here; you 
may encounter the cross product in more advanced mathematics courses. 
The dot product of two vectors involves multiplying two vectors together, and the result is a scalar. 

Dot Product 

The dot product of two vectors  and  is the sum of the product of the horizontal components and 
the product of the vertical components. 

To find the angle between the two vectors, use the formula below. 

EXAMPLE 14 

Finding the Dot Product of Two Vectors 
Find the dot product of  and 

Solution 
Using the formula, we have 

EXAMPLE 15 

Finding the Dot Product of Two Vectors and the Angle between Them 
Find the dot product of v1 = 5i + 2j and v2 = 3i + 7j. Then, find the angle between the two vectors. 

Solution 
Finding the dot product, we multiply corresponding components. 

To find the angle between them, we use the formula 

Access for free at openstax.org



10.8 • Vectors     983

See Figure 17. 

Figure 17 

EXAMPLE 16 

Finding the Angle between Two Vectors 
Find the angle between  and 

Solution 
Using the formula, we have 

See Figure 18. 



984     10 • Further Applications of Trigonometry

Figure 18 

EXAMPLE 17 

Finding Ground Speed and Bearing Using Vectors 
We now have the tools to solve the problem we introduced in the opening of the section. 
An airplane is flying at an airspeed of 200 miles per hour headed on a SE bearing of 140°. A north wind (from north to 
south) is blowing at 16.2 miles per hour. What are the ground speed and actual bearing of the plane? See Figure 19. 

Figure 19 

Solution 
The ground speed is represented by  in the diagram, and we need to find the angle  in order to calculate the adjusted 
bearing, which will be 
Notice in Figure 19, that angle  must be equal to angle  by the rule of alternating interior angles, so angle 

 is 140°. We can find  by the Law of Cosines: 

The ground speed is approximately 213 miles per hour. Now we can calculate the bearing using the Law of Sines. 

Access for free at openstax.org



10.8 • Vectors     985

Therefore, the plane has a SE bearing of 140°+2.8°=142.8°. The ground speed is 212.7 miles per hour. 

 MEDIA 

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with vectors. 

Introduction to Vectors (https://openstax.org/l/introvectors) 
Vector Operations (https://openstax.org/l/vectoroperation) 
The Unit Vector (https://openstax.org/l/unitvector) 

 10.8 SECTION EXERCISES 
Verbal 

1 . What are the characteristics  2 . How is a vector more  3 . What are  and  and what 
of the letters that are specific than a line do they represent? 
commonly used to segment? 
represent vectors? 

4 . What is component form?  5 . When a unit vector is 
expressed as  which 
letter is the coefficient of the 
 and which the 

Algebraic 

6 . Given a vector with initial  7 . Given a vector with initial  8 . Given a vector with initial 
point  and terminal point  and terminal point  and terminal 
point  find an point  find an point  find an 
equivalent vector whose equivalent vector whose equivalent vector whose 
initial point is  Write initial point is  Write initial point is  Write 
the vector in component the vector in component the vector in component 
form form form 

For the following exercises, determine whether the two vectors  and  are equal, where  has an initial point  and a 
terminal point  and  has an initial point  and a terminal point . 
9 .  and  10 .  and 

11 .  and  12 .  and 

13 .  and  14 . Given initial point  and terminal point 
 write the vector  in terms of  and 

15 . Given initial point  and terminal point 
 write the vector  in terms of  and 

For the following exercises, use the vectors u = i + 5j, v = −2i− 3j,  and w = 4i − j. 
16 . Find u + (v − w)  17 . Find 4v + 2u 



986     10 • Further Applications of Trigonometry

For the following exercises, use the given vectors to compute u + v, u − v, and 2u − 3v. 
18 .  19 .  20 . Let v = −4i + 3j. Find a 

vector that is half the 
length and points in the 
same direction as 

21 . Let v = 5i + 2j. Find a vector 
that is twice the length and 
points in the opposite 
direction as 

For the following exercises, find a unit vector in the same direction as the given vector. 
22 . a = 3i + 4j  23 . b = −2i + 5j  24 . c = 10i – j 

25 .  26 . u = 100i + 200j  27 . u = −14i + 2j 

For the following exercises, find the magnitude and direction of the vector, 
28 .  29 .  30 . 
31 .  32 . Given u = 3i − 4j and v =  33 . Given u = −i − j and v = i + 

−2i + 3j, calculate 5j, calculate 
34 . Given  and  35 . Given u  and v 

 calculate  calculate 

Graphical 

For the following exercises, given  draw  3v and 

36 .  37 . 38 . 

For the following exercises, use the vectors shown to sketch u + v, u − v, and 2u. 
39 . 40 . 41 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



10.8 • Vectors     987

For the following exercises, use the vectors shown to sketch 2u + v. 
42 . 43 . 

For the following exercises, use the vectors shown to sketch u − 3v. 
44 . 45 . 

For the following exercises, write the vector shown in component form. 
46 . 47 . 48 . Given initial point 

 and terminal 
point  write 
the vector  in terms of 
and  then draw the vector 
on the graph. 

49 . Given initial point 50 . Given initial point 
 and terminal  and terminal 

point  write point  write 
the vector  in terms of the vector  in terms of 
and  Draw the points and and  Draw the points and 
the vector on the graph. the vector on the graph. 

Extensions 

For the following exercises, use the given magnitude and direction in standard position, write the vector in component 
form. 
51 .  52 .  53 . 



988     10 • Further Applications of Trigonometry

54 .  55 . A 60-pound box is resting  56 . A 25-pound box is resting 
on a ramp that is inclined on a ramp that is inclined 
12°. Rounding to the 8°. Rounding to the 
nearest tenth, nearest tenth, 
ⓐ  Find the magnitude of ⓐ  Find the magnitude of 
the normal (perpendicular) the normal (perpendicular) 
component of the force. component of the force. 
ⓑ  Find the magnitude of ⓑ  Find the magnitude of 
the component of the force the component of the force 
that is parallel to the ramp. that is parallel to the ramp. 

57 . Find the magnitude of the  58 . Find the magnitude of the  59 . Find the magnitude of the 
horizontal and vertical horizontal and vertical horizontal and vertical 
components of a vector components of the vector components of a vector 
with magnitude 8 pounds with magnitude 4 pounds with magnitude 5 pounds 
pointed in a direction of pointed in a direction of pointed in a direction of 
27° above the horizontal. 127° above the horizontal. 55° above the horizontal. 
Round to the nearest Round to the nearest Round to the nearest 
hundredth. hundredth. hundredth. 

60 . Find the magnitude of the 
horizontal and vertical 
components of the vector 
with magnitude 1 pound 
pointed in a direction of 8° 
above the horizontal. 
Round to the nearest 
hundredth. 

Real-World Applications 

61 . A woman leaves home and  62 . A boat leaves the marina  63 . A man starts walking from 
walks 3 miles west, then 2 and sails 6 miles north, home and walks 4 miles 
miles southwest. How far then 2 miles northeast. east, 2 miles southeast, 5 
from home is she, and in How far from the marina is miles south, 4 miles 
what direction must she the boat, and in what southwest, and 2 miles 
walk to head directly direction must it sail to east. How far has he 
home? head directly back to the walked? If he walked 

marina? straight home, how far 
would he have to walk? 

64 . A woman starts walking  65 . A man starts walking from  66 . A woman starts walking 
from home and walks 4 home and walks 3 miles at from home and walks 6 
miles east, 7 miles 20° north of west, then 5 miles at 40° north of east, 
southeast, 6 miles south, 5 miles at 10° west of south, then 2 miles at 15° east of 
miles southwest, and 3 then 4 miles at 15° north of south, then 5 miles at 30° 
miles east. How far has she east. If he walked straight south of west. If she 
walked? If she walked home, how far would he walked straight home, how 
straight home, how far have to the walk, and in far would she have to walk, 
would she have to walk? what direction? and in what direction? 

Access for free at openstax.org



10.8 • Vectors     989

67 . An airplane is heading  68 . An airplane is heading  69 . An airplane needs to head 
north at an airspeed of 600 north at an airspeed of 500 due north, but there is a 
km/hr, but there is a wind km/hr, but there is a wind wind blowing from the 
blowing from the blowing from the southwest at 60 km/hr. The 
southwest at 80 km/hr. northwest at 50 km/hr. plane flies with an airspeed 
How many degrees off How many degrees off of 550 km/hr. To end up 
course will the plane end course will the plane end flying due north, how 
up flying, and what is the up flying, and what is the many degrees west of 
plane’s speed relative to plane’s speed relative to north will the pilot need to 
the ground? the ground? fly the plane? 

70 . An airplane needs to head  71 . As part of a video game,  72 . As part of a video game, 
due north, but there is a the point  is rotated the point  is rotated 
wind blowing from the counterclockwise about the counterclockwise about the 
northwest at 80 km/hr. The origin through an angle of origin through an angle of 
plane flies with an airspeed 35°. Find the new 40°. Find the new 
of 500 km/hr. To end up coordinates of this point. coordinates of this point. 
flying due north, how 
many degrees west of 
north will the pilot need to 
fly the plane? 

73 . Two children are throwing  74 . Two children are throwing  75 . A 50-pound object rests on 
a ball back and forth a ball back and forth a ramp that is inclined 19°. 
straight across the back straight across the back Find the magnitude of the 
seat of a car. The ball is seat of a car. The ball is components of the force 
being thrown 10 mph being thrown 8 mph parallel to and 
relative to the car, and the relative to the car, and the perpendicular to (normal) 
car is traveling 25 mph car is traveling 45 mph the ramp to the nearest 
down the road. If one child down the road. If one child tenth of a pound. 
doesn't catch the ball, and doesn't catch the ball, and 
it flies out the window, in it flies out the window, in 
what direction does the what direction does the 
ball fly (ignoring wind ball fly (ignoring wind 
resistance)? resistance)? 

76 . Suppose a body has a force  77 . Suppose a body has a force  78 . The condition of 
of 10 pounds acting on it to of 10 pounds acting on it to equilibrium is when the 
the right, 25 pounds acting the right, 25 pounds acting sum of the forces acting on 
on it upward, and 5 pounds on it ─135° from the a body is the zero vector. 
acting on it 45° from the horizontal, and 5 pounds Suppose a body has a force 
horizontal. What single acting on it directed 150° of 2 pounds acting on it to 
force is the resultant force from the horizontal. What the right, 5 pounds acting 
acting on the body? single force is the resultant on it upward, and 3 pounds 

force acting on the body? acting on it 45° from the 
horizontal. What single 
force is needed to produce 
a state of equilibrium on 
the body? 

79 . Suppose a body has a force 
of 3 pounds acting on it to 
the left, 4 pounds acting on 
it upward, and 2 pounds 
acting on it 30° from the 
horizontal. What single 
force is needed to produce 
a state of equilibrium on 
the body? Draw the vector. 



990     10 • Chapter Review

Chapter Review 
Key Terms 
altitude  a perpendicular line from one vertex of a triangle to the opposite side, or in the case of an obtuse triangle, to 

the line containing the opposite side, forming two right triangles 
ambiguous case  a scenario in which more than one triangle is a valid solution for a given oblique SSA triangle 
Archimedes’ spiral  a polar curve given by  When multiplied by a constant, the equation appears as  As 

 the curve continues to widen in a spiral path over the domain. 
argument  the angle associated with a complex number; the angle between the line from the origin to the point and 

the positive real axis 
cardioid  a member of the limaçon family of curves, named for its resemblance to a heart; its equation is given as 

 and  where 
convex limaҫon a type of one-loop limaçon represented by  and  such that 
De Moivre’s Theorem  formula used to find the  power or nth roots of a complex number; states that, for a positive 

integer  is found by raising the modulus to the  power and multiplying the angles by 
dimpled limaҫon a type of one-loop limaçon represented by  and  such that 
dot product  given two vectors, the sum of the product of the horizontal components and the product of the vertical 

components 
Generalized Pythagorean Theorem  an extension of the Law of Cosines; relates the sides of an oblique triangle and is 

used for SAS and SSS triangles 
initial point  the origin of a vector 
inner-loop limaçon a polar curve similar to the cardioid, but with an inner loop; passes through the pole twice; 

represented by  and  where 
Law of Cosines  states that the square of any side of a triangle is equal to the sum of the squares of the other two sides 

minus twice the product of the other two sides and the cosine of the included angle 
Law of Sines  states that the ratio of the measurement of one angle of a triangle to the length of its opposite side is 

equal to the remaining two ratios of angle measure to opposite side; any pair of proportions may be used to solve for 
a missing angle or side 

lemniscate a polar curve resembling a figure 8 and given by the equation  and  
magnitude  the length of a vector; may represent a quantity such as speed, and is calculated using the Pythagorean 

Theorem 
modulus  the absolute value of a complex number, or the distance from the origin to the point  also called the 

amplitude 
oblique triangle  any triangle that is not a right triangle 
one-loop limaҫon a polar curve represented by  and  such that  and 

may be dimpled or convex; does not pass through the pole 
parameter  a variable, often representing time, upon which  and  are both dependent 
polar axis  on the polar grid, the equivalent of the positive x-axis on the rectangular grid 
polar coordinates  on the polar grid, the coordinates of a point labeled  where  indicates the angle of rotation 

from the polar axis and  represents the radius, or the distance of the point from the pole in the direction of 
polar equation an equation describing a curve on the polar grid. 
polar form of a complex number  a complex number expressed in terms of an angle  and its distance from the origin 

 can be found by using conversion formulas  and 
pole  the origin of the polar grid 
resultant  a vector that results from addition or subtraction of two vectors, or from scalar multiplication 
rose curve  a polar equation resembling a flower, given by the equations  and  when  is even 

there are  petals, and the curve is highly symmetrical; when  is odd there are  petals. 
scalar  a quantity associated with magnitude but not direction; a constant 
scalar multiplication  the product of a constant and each component of a vector 
standard position  the placement of a vector with the initial point at  and the terminal point  represented by 

the change in the x-coordinates and the change in the y-coordinates of the original vector 
terminal point  the end point of a vector, usually represented by an arrow indicating its direction 
unit vector  a vector that begins at the origin and has magnitude of 1; the horizontal unit vector runs along the x-axis 

and is defined as  the vertical unit vector runs along the y-axis and is defined as 
vector  a quantity associated with both magnitude and direction, represented as a directed line segment with a starting 

point (initial point) and an end point (terminal point) 
vector addition  the sum of two vectors, found by adding corresponding components 

Access for free at openstax.org



10 • Chapter Review     991

Key Equations 

Law of Sines 

Area for oblique triangles 

Law of Cosines 

Heron’s formula 

Conversion formulas 

Key Concepts 
10.1 Non-right Triangles: Law of Sines 

• The Law of Sines can be used to solve oblique triangles, which are non-right triangles. 
• According to the Law of Sines, the ratio of the measurement of one of the angles to the length of its opposite side 

equals the other two ratios of angle measure to opposite side. 
• There are three possible cases: ASA, AAS, SSA. Depending on the information given, we can choose the appropriate 

equation to find the requested solution. See Example 1. 
• The ambiguous case arises when an oblique triangle can have different outcomes. 
• There are three possible cases that arise from SSA arrangement—a single solution, two possible solutions, and no 

solution. See Example 2 and Example 3. 
• The Law of Sines can be used to solve triangles with given criteria. See Example 4. 
• The general area formula for triangles translates to oblique triangles by first finding the appropriate height value. 

See Example 5. 
• There are many trigonometric applications. They can often be solved by first drawing a diagram of the given 

information and then using the appropriate equation. See Example 6. 

10.2 Non-right Triangles: Law of Cosines 
• The Law of Cosines defines the relationship among angle measurements and lengths of sides in oblique triangles. 
• The Generalized Pythagorean Theorem is the Law of Cosines for two cases of oblique triangles: SAS and SSS. 

Dropping an imaginary perpendicular splits the oblique triangle into two right triangles or forms one right triangle, 
which allows sides to be related and measurements to be calculated. See Example 1 and Example 2. 

• The Law of Cosines is useful for many types of applied problems. The first step in solving such problems is generally 
to draw a sketch of the problem presented. If the information given fits one of the three models (the three 
equations), then apply the Law of Cosines to find a solution. See Example 3 and Example 4. 

• Heron’s formula allows the calculation of area in oblique triangles. All three sides must be known to apply Heron’s 
formula. See Example 5 and See Example 6. 



992     10 • Chapter Review

10.3 Polar Coordinates 
• The polar grid is represented as a series of concentric circles radiating out from the pole, or origin. 
• To plot a point in the form  move in a counterclockwise direction from the polar axis by an angle of 

and then extend a directed line segment from the pole the length of  in the direction of  If  is negative, move in a 
clockwise direction, and extend a directed line segment the length of  in the direction of  See Example 1. 

• If  is negative, extend the directed line segment in the opposite direction of  See Example 2. 
• To convert from polar coordinates to rectangular coordinates, use the formulas  and  See 

Example 3 and Example 4. 
• To convert from rectangular coordinates to polar coordinates, use one or more of the formulas: 

 and  See Example 5. 
• Transforming equations between polar and rectangular forms means making the appropriate substitutions based 

on the available formulas, together with algebraic manipulations. See Example 6, Example 7, and Example 8. 
• Using the appropriate substitutions makes it possible to rewrite a polar equation as a rectangular equation, and 

then graph it in the rectangular plane. See Example 9, Example 10, and Example 11. 

10.4 Polar Coordinates: Graphs 
• It is easier to graph polar equations if we can test the equations for symmetry with respect to the line  the 

polar axis, or the pole. 
• There are three symmetry tests that indicate whether the graph of a polar equation will exhibit symmetry. If an 

equation fails a symmetry test, the graph may or may not exhibit symmetry. See Example 1. 
• Polar equations may be graphed by making a table of values for  and 
• The maximum value of a polar equation is found by substituting the value  that leads to the maximum value of the 

trigonometric expression. 
• The zeros of a polar equation are found by setting  and solving for  See Example 2. 
• Some formulas that produce the graph of a circle in polar coordinates are given by  and  See 

Example 3. 
• The formulas that produce the graphs of a cardioid are given by  and  for 

 and  See Example 4. 
• The formulas that produce the graphs of a one-loop limaçon are given by  and  for 

 See Example 5. 
• The formulas that produce the graphs of an inner-loop limaçon are given by  and  for 

  and  See Example 6. 
• The formulas that produce the graphs of a lemniscates are given by  and  where 

 See Example 7. 
• The formulas that produce the graphs of rose curves are given by  and  where  if  is 

even, there are  petals, and if  is odd, there are  petals. See Example 8 and Example 9. 
• The formula that produces the graph of an Archimedes’ spiral is given by   See Example 10. 

10.5 Polar Form of Complex Numbers 
• Complex numbers in the form  are plotted in the complex plane similar to the way rectangular coordinates are 

plotted in the rectangular plane. Label the x-axis as the real axis and the y-axis as the imaginary axis. See Example 1. 
• The absolute value of a complex number is the same as its magnitude. It is the distance from the origin to the point: 

 See Example 2 and Example 3. 
• To write complex numbers in polar form, we use the formulas  and  Then, 

 See Example 4 and Example 5. 
• To convert from polar form to rectangular form, first evaluate the trigonometric functions. Then, multiply through 

by  See Example 6 and Example 7. 
• To find the product of two complex numbers, multiply the two moduli and add the two angles. Evaluate the 

trigonometric functions, and multiply using the distributive property. See Example 8. 
• To find the quotient of two complex numbers in polar form, find the quotient of the two moduli and the difference 

of the two angles. See Example 9. 
• To find the power of a complex number  raise  to the power  and multiply  by  See Example 10. 
• Finding the roots of a complex number is the same as raising a complex number to a power, but using a rational 

exponent. See Example 11. 

Access for free at openstax.org



10 • Chapter Review     993

10.6 Parametric Equations 
• Parameterizing a curve involves translating a rectangular equation in two variables,  and  into two equations in 

three variables, x, y, and t. Often, more information is obtained from a set of parametric equations. See Example 1, 
Example 2, and Example 3. 

• Sometimes equations are simpler to graph when written in rectangular form. By eliminating  an equation in  and 
 is the result. 

• To eliminate  solve one of the equations for  and substitute the expression into the second equation. See Example 
4, Example 5, Example 6, and Example 7. 

• Finding the rectangular equation for a curve defined parametrically is basically the same as eliminating the 
parameter. Solve for  in one of the equations, and substitute the expression into the second equation. See Example 
8. 

• There are an infinite number of ways to choose a set of parametric equations for a curve defined as a rectangular 
equation. 

• Find an expression for  such that the domain of the set of parametric equations remains the same as the original 
rectangular equation. See Example 9. 

10.7 Parametric Equations: Graphs 
• When there is a third variable, a third parameter on which  and  depend, parametric equations can be used. 
• To graph parametric equations by plotting points, make a table with three columns labeled  and  Choose 

values for  in increasing order. Plot the last two columns for  and  See Example 1 and Example 2. 
• When graphing a parametric curve by plotting points, note the associated t-values and show arrows on the graph 

indicating the orientation of the curve. See Example 3 and Example 4. 
• Parametric equations allow the direction or the orientation of the curve to be shown on the graph. Equations that 

are not functions can be graphed and used in many applications involving motion. See Example 5. 
• Projectile motion depends on two parametric equations:  and  Initial 

velocity is symbolized as  represents the initial angle of the object when thrown, and  represents the height at 
which the object is propelled. 

10.8 Vectors 
• The position vector has its initial point at the origin. See Example 1. 
• If the position vector is the same for two vectors, they are equal. See Example 2. 
• Vectors are defined by their magnitude and direction. See Example 3. 
• If two vectors have the same magnitude and direction, they are equal. See Example 4. 
• Vector addition and subtraction result in a new vector found by adding or subtracting corresponding elements. See 

Example 5. 
• Scalar multiplication is multiplying a vector by a constant. Only the magnitude changes; the direction stays the 

same. See Example 6 and Example 7. 
• Vectors are comprised of two components: the horizontal component along the positive x-axis, and the vertical 

component along the positive y-axis. See Example 8. 
• The unit vector in the same direction of any nonzero vector is found by dividing the vector by its magnitude. 
• The magnitude of a vector in the rectangular coordinate system is  See Example 9. 
• In the rectangular coordinate system, unit vectors may be represented in terms of  and  where  represents the 

horizontal component and  represents the vertical component. Then, v = ai + bj  is a scalar multiple of  by real 
numbers  See Example 10 and Example 11. 

• Adding and subtracting vectors in terms of i and j consists of adding or subtracting corresponding coefficients of i 
and corresponding coefficients of j. See Example 12. 

• A vector v = ai + bj is written in terms of magnitude and direction as  See Example 13. 
• The dot product of two vectors is the product of the  terms plus the product of the  terms. See Example 14. 
• We can use the dot product to find the angle between two vectors. Example 15 and Example 16. 
• Dot products are useful for many types of physics applications. See Example 17. 



994     10 • Exercises

Exercises 
Review Exercises 
Non-right Triangles: Law of Sines 
For the following exercises, assume  is opposite side  is opposite side  and  is opposite side  Solve each triangle, 
if possible. Round each answer to the nearest tenth. 
1 .  2 .  3 . Solve the triangle. 

4 . Find the area of the triangle. 5 . A pilot is flying over a straight 
highway. He determines the angles 
of depression to two mileposts, 2.1 
km apart, to be 25° and 49°, as 
shown in Figure 1. Find the 
distance of the plane from point 
and the elevation of the plane. 

Figure 1 

Non-right Triangles: Law of Cosines 
6 . Solve the triangle, rounding  7 . Solve the triangle in Figure 8 . Find the area of a triangle 

to the nearest tenth, 2, rounding to the nearest with sides of length 8.3, 6.6, 
assuming  is opposite side tenth. and 9.1. 

 is opposite side  and 
is opposite side 

Figure 2 

Access for free at openstax.org



10 • Exercises     995

9 . To find the distance between two 
cities, a satellite calculates the 
distances and angle shown in 
Figure 3 (not to scale). Find the 
distance between the cities. Round 
answers to the nearest tenth. 

Figure 3 

Polar Coordinates 
10 . Plot the point with polar  11 . Plot the point with polar 12 . Convert  to 

coordinates coordinates rectangular coordinates. 

13 . Convert  to  14 . Convert  to polar  15 . Convert  to polar 
rectangular coordinates. coordinates. coordinates. 

For the following exercises, convert the given Cartesian equation to a polar equation. 

16 .  17 .  18 . 

For the following exercises, convert the given polar equation to a Cartesian equation. 

19 .  20 . 

For the following exercises, convert to rectangular form and graph. 

21 . 22 . 

Polar Coordinates: Graphs 

For the following exercises, test each equation for symmetry. 
23 .  24 .  25 . Sketch a graph of the polar 

equation 
Label the axis intercepts. 

26 . Sketch a graph of the polar  27 . Sketch a graph of the polar 
equation equation 

Polar Form of Complex Numbers 

For the following exercises, find the absolute value of each complex number. 

28 .  29 . ​

Write the complex number in polar form. 

30 .  31 . ​



996     10 • Exercises

For the following exercises, convert the complex number from polar to rectangular form. 

32 .  33 . 

For the following exercises, find the product  in polar form. 

34 .  35 . 

For the following exercises, find the quotient  in polar form. 

36 .  37 . 

For the following exercises, find the powers of each complex number in polar form. 

38 . Find  when  39 . Find  when 

For the following exercises, evaluate each root. 
40 . Evaluate the cube root of  41 . Evaluate the square root of 

when  when 

For the following exercises, plot the complex number in the complex plane. 
42 .  43 . 

Parametric Equations 

For the following exercises, eliminate the parameter  to rewrite the parametric equation as a Cartesian equation. 

44 .  45 .  46 . Parameterize (write a 
parametric equation for) 
each Cartesian equation by 
using  and 

 for 

47 . Parameterize the line from 
 to  so that the 

line is at  at 
and  at 

Parametric Equations: Graphs 

For the following exercises, make a table of values for each set of parametric equations, graph the equations, and 
include an orientation; then write the Cartesian equation. 

48 .  49 . 50 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



10 • Exercises     997

51 . A ball is launched with an initial velocity of 80 feet 
per second at an angle of 40° to the horizontal. 
The ball is released at a height of 4 feet above the 
ground. 
ⓐ  Find the parametric equations to model the 
path of the ball. 
ⓑ  Where is the ball after 3 seconds? 
ⓒ  How long is the ball in the air? 

Vectors 

For the following exercises, determine whether the two vectors,  and  are equal, where  has an initial point  and a 
terminal point  and  has an initial point  and a terminal point 
52 .  and  53 .  and 

For the following exercises, use the vectors  and  to evaluate the expression. 
54 . u − v  55 . 2v − u + w 

For the following exercises, find a unit vector in the same direction as the given vector. 
56 . a = 8i − 6j  57 . b = −3i − j 

For the following exercises, find the magnitude and direction of the vector. 
58 .  59 . 

For the following exercises, calculate 
60 . u = −2i + j and v = 3i + 7j  61 . u = i + 4j and v = 4i + 3j  62 . Given v  draw v, 

2v, and  v. 

63 . Given the vectors shown in Figure 46, 4 . Given initial point 
sketch u + v, u − v and 3v.  and terminal 

point  write 
the vector  in terms of 
and  Draw the points and 
the vector on the graph. 

Figure 4 



998     10 • Exercises

Practice Test 
1 . Assume  is opposite side  2 . Find the area of the triangle 3 . A pilot flies in a straight path 

 is opposite side  and in Figure 1. Round each for 2 hours. He then makes 
is opposite side  Solve the answer to the nearest tenth. a course correction, heading 
triangle, if possible, and 15° to the right of his 
round each answer to the original course, and flies 1 
nearest tenth, given hour in the new direction. If 

he maintains a constant 
speed of 575 miles per hour, 
how far is he from his 
starting position? 

Figure 1 

4 . Convert  to polar  5 . Convert  to  6 . Convert the polar equation 
coordinates, and then plot rectangular coordinates. to a Cartesian equation: 
the point. 

7 . Convert to rectangular form 8 . Test the equation for  9 . Graph 
and graph: symmetry: 

10 . Graph  11 . Find the absolute value of  12 . Write the complex number 
the complex number in polar form: 

13 . Convert the complex 
number from polar to 
rectangular form: 

Given  and  evaluate each expression. 

14 .  15 .  16 . 

17 .  18 . Plot the complex number  19 . Eliminate the parameter 
 in the complex to rewrite the following 

plane. parametric equations as a 
Cartesian equation: 

20 . Parameterize (write a  21 . Graph the set of 22 . A ball is launched with an 
parametric equation for) parametric equations and initial velocity of 95 feet 
the following Cartesian find the Cartesian per second at an angle of 
equation by using equation: 52° to the horizontal. The 

 and ball is released at a height 
of 3.5 feet above the 
ground. 
ⓐ Find the parametric 
equations to model the 
path of the ball. 
ⓑ Where is the ball after 2 
seconds? 
ⓒ How long is the ball in 
the air? 

Access for free at openstax.org



10 • Exercises     999

For the following exercises, use the vectors u = i − 3j and v = 2i + 3j. 
23 . Find 2u − 3v.  24 . Calculate  25 . Find a unit vector in the 

same direction as 
26 . Given vector  has an initial 

point  and 
terminal point 

 write the 
vector  in terms of  and 
On the graph, draw  and 



1000     10 • Exercises

Access for free at openstax.org



11 • Introduction to Systems of Equations and Inequalities          1001

11 SYSTEMS OF EQUATIONS AND 
INEQUALITIES 

Enigma machines like this one were used by government and military officials for enciphering and deciphering top-
secret communications during World War II. By varying the combinations of the plugboard and the settings of the 
rotors, encoders could add complex encryption to their messages. Notice that the three rotors each contain 26 pins, one 
for each letter of the alphabet; later versions had four and five rotors. (credit: modification of "Enigma Machine" by 
School of Mathematics, University of Manchester/flickr) 

Chapter Outline 
11.1 Systems of Linear Equations: Two Variables 
11.2 Systems of Linear Equations: Three Variables 
11.3 Systems of Nonlinear Equations and Inequalities: Two Variables 
11.4 Partial Fractions 
11.5 Matrices and Matrix Operations 
11.6 Solving Systems with Gaussian Elimination 
11.7 Solving Systems with Inverses 
11.8 Solving Systems with Cramer's Rule 

Introduction to Systems of Equations and Inequalities 
At the start of the Second World War, British military and intelligence officers recognized that defeating Nazi Germany 
would require the Allies to know what the enemy was planning. This task was complicated by the fact that the German 
military transmitted all of its communications through a presumably uncrackable code created by a machine called 
Enigma. The Germans had been encoding their messages with this machine since the early 1930s, and were so confident 
in its security that they used it for everyday military communications as well as highly important strategic messages. 
Concerned about the increasing military threat, other European nations began working to decipher the Enigma codes. 
Poland was the first country to make significant advances when it trained and recruited a new group of codebreakers: 
math students from Poznań University. With the help of intelligence obtained by French spies, Polish mathematicians, 
led by Marian Rejewski, were able to decipher initial codes and later to understand the wiring of the machines; 
eventually they create replicas. However, the German military eventually increased the complexity of the machines by 
adding additional rotors, requiring a new method of decryption. 
The machine attached letters on a keyboard to three, four, or five rotors (depending on the version), each with 26 
starting positions that could be set prior to encoding; a decryption code (called a cipher key) essentially conveyed these 
settings to the message recipient, and allowed people to interpret the message using another Enigma machine. Even 
with the simpler three-rotor scrambler, there were 17,576 different combinations of starting positions (26 x 26 x 26); plus 
the machine had numerous other methods of introducing variation. Not long after the war started, the British recruited 
a team of brilliant codebreakers to crack the Enigma code. The codebreakers, led by Alan Turing, used what they knew 
about the Enigma machine to build a mechanical computer that could crack the code. And that knowledge of what the 
Germans were planning proved to be a key part of the ultimate Allied victory of Nazi Germany in 1945. 



1002     11 • Systems of Equations and Inequalities

The Enigma is perhaps the most famous cryptographic device ever known. It stands as an example of the pivotal role 
cryptography has played in society. Now, technology has moved cryptanalysis to the digital world. 
Many ciphers are designed using invertible matrices as the method of message transference, as finding the inverse of a 
matrix is generally part of the process of decoding. In addition to knowing the matrix and its inverse, the receiver must 
also know the key that, when used with the matrix inverse, will allow the message to be read. 
In this chapter, we will investigate matrices and their inverses, and various ways to use matrices to solve systems of 
equations. First, however, we will study systems of equations on their own: linear and nonlinear, and then partial 
fractions. We will not be breaking any secret codes here, but we will lay the foundation for future courses. 

11.1 Systems of Linear Equations: Two Variables 
Learning Objectives 
In this section, you will: 

Solve systems of equations by graphing. 
Solve systems of equations by substitution. 
Solve systems of equations by addition. 
Identify inconsistent systems of equations containing two variables. 
Express the solution of a system of dependent equations containing two variables. 

Figure 1 (credit: Thomas Sørenes) 
A skateboard manufacturer introduces a new line of boards. The manufacturer tracks its costs, which is the amount it 
spends to produce the boards, and its revenue, which is the amount it earns through sales of its boards. How can the 
company determine if it is making a profit with its new line? How many skateboards must be produced and sold before a 
profit is possible? In this section, we will consider linear equations with two variables to answer these and similar 
questions. 

Introduction to Systems of Equations 
In order to investigate situations such as that of the skateboard manufacturer, we need to recognize that we are dealing 
with more than one variable and likely more than one equation. A system of linear equations consists of two or more 
linear equations made up of two or more variables such that all equations in the system are considered simultaneously. 
To find the unique solution to a system of linear equations, we must find a numerical value for each variable in the 
system that will satisfy all equations in the system at the same time. Some linear systems may not have a solution and 
others may have an infinite number of solutions. In order for a linear system to have a unique solution, there must be at 
least as many equations as there are variables. Even so, this does not guarantee a unique solution. 
In this section, we will look at systems of linear equations in two variables, which consist of two equations that contain 
two different variables. For example, consider the following system of linear equations in two variables. 

The solution to a system of linear equations in two variables is any ordered pair that satisfies each equation 
independently. In this example, the ordered pair (4, 7) is the solution to the system of linear equations. We can verify the 
solution by substituting the values into each equation to see if the ordered pair satisfies both equations. Shortly we will 
investigate methods of finding such a solution if it exists. 

Access for free at openstax.org



11.1 • Systems of Linear Equations: Two Variables     1003

In addition to considering the number of equations and variables, we can categorize systems of linear equations by the 
number of solutions. A consistent system of equations has at least one solution. A consistent system is considered to 
be an independent system if it has a single solution, such as the example we just explored. The two lines have different 
slopes and intersect at one point in the plane. A consistent system is considered to be a dependent system if the 
equations have the same slope and the same y-intercepts. In other words, the lines coincide so the equations represent 
the same line. Every point on the line represents a coordinate pair that satisfies the system. Thus, there are an infinite 
number of solutions. 
Another type of system of linear equations is an inconsistent system, which is one in which the equations represent 
two parallel lines. The lines have the same slope and different y-intercepts. There are no points common to both lines; 
hence, there is no solution to the system. 

Types of Linear Systems 

There are three types of systems of linear equations in two variables, and three types of solutions. 

• An independent system has exactly one solution pair  The point where the two lines intersect is the only 
solution. 

• An inconsistent system has no solution. Notice that the two lines are parallel and will never intersect. 
• A dependent system has infinitely many solutions. The lines are coincident. They are the same line, so every 

coordinate pair on the line is a solution to both equations. 

Figure 2 compares graphical representations of each type of system. 

Figure 2 

...
HOW TO 

Given a system of linear equations and an ordered pair, determine whether the ordered pair is a solution. 

1. Substitute the ordered pair into each equation in the system. 
2. Determine whether true statements result from the substitution in both equations; if so, the ordered pair is a 

solution. 

EXAMPLE 1 

Determining Whether an Ordered Pair Is a Solution to a System of Equations 
Determine whether the ordered pair  is a solution to the given system of equations. 



1004     11 • Systems of Equations and Inequalities

Solution 
Substitute the ordered pair  into both equations. 

The ordered pair  satisfies both equations, so it is the solution to the system. 

Analysis 
We can see the solution clearly by plotting the graph of each equation. Since the solution is an ordered pair that satisfies 
both equations, it is a point on both of the lines and thus the point of intersection of the two lines. See Figure 3. 

Figure 3 

 TRY IT #1 Determine whether the ordered pair  is a solution to the following system. 

Solving Systems of Equations by Graphing 
There are multiple methods of solving systems of linear equations. For a system of linear equations in two variables, we 
can determine both the type of system and the solution by graphing the system of equations on the same set of axes. 

EXAMPLE 2 

Solving a System of Equations in Two Variables by Graphing 
Solve the following system of equations by graphing. Identify the type of system. 

Solution 
Solve the first equation for 

Solve the second equation for 

Graph both equations on the same set of axes as in Figure 4. 

Access for free at openstax.org



11.1 • Systems of Linear Equations: Two Variables     1005

Figure 4 
The lines appear to intersect at the point  We can check to make sure that this is the solution to the system by 
substituting the ordered pair into both equations. 

The solution to the system is the ordered pair  so the system is independent. 

 TRY IT #2 Solve the following system of equations by graphing. 

 Q&A Can graphing be used if the system is inconsistent or dependent? 

Yes, in both cases we can still graph the system to determine the type of system and solution. If the 
two lines are parallel, the system has no solution and is inconsistent. If the two lines are identical, the 
system has infinite solutions and is a dependent system. 

Solving Systems of Equations by Substitution 
Solving a linear system in two variables by graphing works well when the solution consists of integer values, but if our 
solution contains decimals or fractions, it is not the most precise method. We will consider two more methods of solving 
a system of linear equations that are more precise than graphing. One such method is solving a system of equations by 
the substitution method, in which we solve one of the equations for one variable and then substitute the result into the 
second equation to solve for the second variable. Recall that we can solve for only one variable at a time, which is the 
reason the substitution method is both valuable and practical. 

...
HOW TO 

Given a system of two equations in two variables, solve using the substitution method. 

1. Solve one of the two equations for one of the variables in terms of the other. 
2. Substitute the expression for this variable into the second equation, then solve for the remaining variable. 
3. Substitute that solution into either of the original equations to find the value of the first variable. If possible, 

write the solution as an ordered pair. 
4. Check the solution in both equations. 



1006     11 • Systems of Equations and Inequalities

EXAMPLE 3 

Solving a System of Equations in Two Variables by Substitution 
Solve the following system of equations by substitution. 

Solution 
First, we will solve the first equation for 

Now we can substitute the expression  for  in the second equation. 

Now, we substitute  into the first equation and solve for 

Our solution is 
Check the solution by substituting  into both equations. 

 TRY IT #3 Solve the following system of equations by substitution. 

 Q&A Can the substitution method be used to solve any linear system in two variables? 

Yes, but the method works best if one of the equations contains a coefficient of 1 or –1 so that we do 
not have to deal with fractions. 

Solving Systems of Equations in Two Variables by the Addition Method 
A third method of solving systems of linear equations is the addition method. In this method, we add two terms with 
the same variable, but opposite coefficients, so that the sum is zero. Of course, not all systems are set up with the two 
terms of one variable having opposite coefficients. Often we must adjust one or both of the equations by multiplication 
so that one variable will be eliminated by addition. 

...
HOW TO 

Given a system of equations, solve using the addition method. 

1. Write both equations with x- and y-variables on the left side of the equal sign and constants on the right. 
2. Write one equation above the other, lining up corresponding variables. If one of the variables in the top equation 

Access for free at openstax.org



11.1 • Systems of Linear Equations: Two Variables     1007

has the opposite coefficient of the same variable in the bottom equation, add the equations together, eliminating 
one variable. If not, use multiplication by a nonzero number so that one of the variables in the top equation has 
the opposite coefficient of the same variable in the bottom equation, then add the equations to eliminate the 
variable. 

3. Solve the resulting equation for the remaining variable. 
4. Substitute that value into one of the original equations and solve for the second variable. 
5. Check the solution by substituting the values into the other equation. 

EXAMPLE 4 

Solving a System by the Addition Method 
Solve the given system of equations by addition. 

Solution 
Both equations are already set equal to a constant. Notice that the coefficient of  in the second equation, –1, is the 
opposite of the coefficient of  in the first equation, 1. We can add the two equations to eliminate  without needing to 
multiply by a constant. 

Now that we have eliminated  we can solve the resulting equation for 

Then, we substitute this value for  into one of the original equations and solve for 

The solution to this system is 

Check the solution in the first equation. 

Analysis 
We gain an important perspective on systems of equations by looking at the graphical representation. See Figure 5 to 
find that the equations intersect at the solution. We do not need to ask whether there may be a second solution because 
observing the graph confirms that the system has exactly one solution. 



1008     11 • Systems of Equations and Inequalities

Figure 5 

EXAMPLE 5 

Using the Addition Method When Multiplication of One Equation Is Required 
Solve the given system of equations by the addition method. 

Solution 
Adding these equations as presented will not eliminate a variable. However, we see that the first equation has  in it 
and the second equation has  So if we multiply the second equation by  the x-terms will add to zero. 

Now, let’s add them. 

For the last step, we substitute  into one of the original equations and solve for 

Our solution is the ordered pair  See Figure 6. Check the solution in the original second equation. 

Access for free at openstax.org



11.1 • Systems of Linear Equations: Two Variables     1009

Figure 6 

 TRY IT #4 Solve the system of equations by addition. 

EXAMPLE 6 

Using the Addition Method When Multiplication of Both Equations Is Required 
Solve the given system of equations in two variables by addition. 

Solution 
One equation has  and the other has  The least common multiple is  so we will have to multiply both equations 
by a constant in order to eliminate one variable. Let’s eliminate  by multiplying the first equation by  and the second 
equation by 

Then, we add the two equations together. 

Substitute  into the original first equation. 

The solution is  Check it in the other equation. 



1010     11 • Systems of Equations and Inequalities

See Figure 7. 

Figure 7 

EXAMPLE 7 

Using the Addition Method in Systems of Equations Containing Fractions 
Solve the given system of equations in two variables by addition. 

​
Solution 

First clear each equation of fractions by multiplying both sides of the equation by the least common denominator. 

Now multiply the second equation by  so that we can eliminate the x-variable. 

Add the two equations to eliminate the x-variable and solve the resulting equation. 

Substitute  into the first equation. 

Access for free at openstax.org



11.1 • Systems of Linear Equations: Two Variables     1011

The solution is  Check it in the other equation. 

 TRY IT #5 Solve the system of equations by addition. 

Identifying Inconsistent Systems of Equations Containing Two Variables 
Now that we have several methods for solving systems of equations, we can use the methods to identify inconsistent 
systems. Recall that an inconsistent system consists of parallel lines that have the same slope but different  -intercepts. 
They will never intersect. When searching for a solution to an inconsistent system, we will come up with a false 
statement, such as 

EXAMPLE 8 

Solving an Inconsistent System of Equations 
Solve the following system of equations. 

Solution 
We can approach this problem in two ways. Because one equation is already solved for  the most obvious step is to use 
substitution. 

Clearly, this statement is a contradiction because  Therefore, the system has no solution. 
The second approach would be to first manipulate the equations so that they are both in slope-intercept form. We 
manipulate the first equation as follows. 

We then convert the second equation expressed to slope-intercept form. 

Comparing the equations, we see that they have the same slope but different y-intercepts. Therefore, the lines are 
parallel and do not intersect. 



1012     11 • Systems of Equations and Inequalities

Analysis 
Writing the equations in slope-intercept form confirms that the system is inconsistent because all lines will intersect 
eventually unless they are parallel. Parallel lines will never intersect; thus, the two lines have no points in common. The 
graphs of the equations in this example are shown in Figure 8. 

Figure 8 

 TRY IT #6 Solve the following system of equations in two variables. 

Expressing the Solution of a System of Dependent Equations Containing Two 
Variables 
Recall that a dependent system of equations in two variables is a system in which the two equations represent the same 
line. Dependent systems have an infinite number of solutions because all of the points on one line are also on the other 
line. After using substitution or addition, the resulting equation will be an identity, such as 

EXAMPLE 9 

Finding a Solution to a Dependent System of Linear Equations 
Find a solution to the system of equations using the addition method. 

Solution 
With the addition method, we want to eliminate one of the variables by adding the equations. In this case, let’s focus on 
eliminating  If we multiply both sides of the first equation by  then we will be able to eliminate the  -variable. 

Now add the equations. 

We can see that there will be an infinite number of solutions that satisfy both equations. 

Access for free at openstax.org



11.1 • Systems of Linear Equations: Two Variables     1013

Analysis 
If we rewrote both equations in the slope-intercept form, we might know what the solution would look like before 
adding. Let’s look at what happens when we convert the system to slope-intercept form. 

See Figure 9. Notice the results are the same. The general solution to the system is 

Figure 9 

 TRY IT #7 Solve the following system of equations in two variables. 

Using Systems of Equations to Investigate Profits 
Using what we have learned about systems of equations, we can return to the skateboard manufacturing problem at the 
beginning of the section. The skateboard manufacturer’s revenue function is the function used to calculate the amount 
of money that comes into the business. It can be represented by the equation  where  quantity and  price. 
The revenue function is shown in orange in Figure 10. 
The cost function is the function used to calculate the costs of doing business. It includes fixed costs, such as rent and 
salaries, and variable costs, such as utilities. The cost function is shown in blue in Figure 10. The  -axis represents 
quantity in hundreds of units. The y-axis represents either cost or revenue in hundreds of dollars. 



1014     11 • Systems of Equations and Inequalities

Figure 10 
The point at which the two lines intersect is called the break-even point. We can see from the graph that if 700 units are 
produced, the cost is $3,300 and the revenue is also $3,300. In other words, the company breaks even if they produce 
and sell 700 units. They neither make money nor lose money. 
The shaded region to the right of the break-even point represents quantities for which the company makes a profit. The 
shaded region to the left represents quantities for which the company suffers a loss. The profit function is the revenue 
function minus the cost function, written as  Clearly, knowing the quantity for which the cost equals 
the revenue is of great importance to businesses. 

EXAMPLE 10 

Finding the Break-Even Point and the Profit Function Using Substitution 
Given the cost function  and the revenue function  find the break-even point and 
the profit function. 

Solution 
Write the system of equations using  to replace function notation. 

Substitute the expression  from the first equation into the second equation and solve for 

Then, we substitute  into either the cost function or the revenue function. 

The break-even point is 
The profit function is found using the formula 

The profit function is 

Analysis 
The cost to produce 50,000 units is $77,500, and the revenue from the sales of 50,000 units is also $77,500. To make a 
profit, the business must produce and sell more than 50,000 units. See Figure 11. 

Access for free at openstax.org



11.1 • Systems of Linear Equations: Two Variables     1015

Figure 11 
We see from the graph in Figure 12 that the profit function has a negative value until  when the graph 
crosses the x-axis. Then, the graph emerges into positive y-values and continues on this path as the profit function is a 
straight line. This illustrates that the break-even point for businesses occurs when the profit function is 0. The area to the 
left of the break-even point represents operating at a loss. 

Figure 12 

EXAMPLE 11 

Writing and Solving a System of Equations in Two Variables 
The cost of a ticket to the circus is  for children and  for adults. On a certain day, attendance at the circus is 

 and the total gate revenue is  How many children and how many adults bought tickets? 

Solution 
Let c = the number of children and a = the number of adults in attendance. 
The total number of people is  We can use this to write an equation for the number of people at the circus that 
day. 

The revenue from all children can be found by multiplying  by the number of children,  The revenue from all 
adults can be found by multiplying  by the number of adults,  The total revenue is  We can use this to 
write an equation for the revenue. 

We now have a system of linear equations in two variables. 

In the first equation, the coefficient of both variables is 1. We can quickly solve the first equation for either  or  We will 



1016     11 • Systems of Equations and Inequalities

solve for 

Substitute the expression  in the second equation for  and solve for 

Substitute  into the first equation to solve for 

We find that  children and  adults bought tickets to the circus that day. 

 TRY IT #8 Meal tickets at the circus cost  for children and  for adults. If  meal tickets were 
bought for a total of  how many children and how many adults bought meal tickets? 

 MEDIA 

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with systems of linear equations. 

Solving Systems of Equations Using Substitution (https://openstax.org/l/syssubst) 
Solving Systems of Equations Using Elimination (https://openstax.org/l/syselim) 
Applications of Systems of Equations (https://openstax.org/l/sysapp) 

 11.1 SECTION EXERCISES 
Verbal 

1 . Can a system of linear  2 . If you are performing a  3 . If you are solving a break-
equations have exactly two break-even analysis for a even analysis and get a 
solutions? Explain why or business and their cost and negative break-even point, 
why not. revenue equations are explain what this signifies 

dependent, explain what for the company? 
this means for the 
company’s profit margins. 

4 . If you are solving a break-  5 . Given a system of 
even analysis and there is equations, explain at least 
no break-even point, explain two different methods of 
what this means for the solving that system. 
company. How should they 
ensure there is a break-even 
point? 

Algebraic 

For the following exercises, determine whether the given ordered pair is a solution to the system of equations. 

6 .  and  7 .  and  8 .  and 

9 .  and  10 .  and 

Access for free at openstax.org



11.1 • Systems of Linear Equations: Two Variables     1017

For the following exercises, solve each system by substitution. 

11 .  12 .  13 . 

14 .  15 .  16 . 

17 .  18 .  19 . 

20 . 

For the following exercises, solve each system by addition. 

21 .  22 .  23 . 

24 .  25 .  26 . 

27 .  28 .  29 . 

30 . 

For the following exercises, solve each system by any method. 

31 .  32 .  33 . 

34 .  35 .  36 . 

37 .  38 .  39 . 

40 . 

Graphical 

For the following exercises, graph the system of equations and state whether the system is consistent, inconsistent, or 
dependent and whether the system has one solution, no solution, or infinite solutions. 

41 .  42 .  43 . 

44 .  45 . 



1018     11 • Systems of Equations and Inequalities

Technology 

For the following exercises, use the intersect function on a graphing device to solve each system. Round all answers to 
the nearest hundredth. 

46 .  47 .  48 . 

49 .  50 . 

Extensions 

For the following exercises, solve each system in terms of  and  where  are nonzero numbers. Note 
that  and 

51 .  52 .  53 . 

54 .  55 . 

Real-World Applications 

For the following exercises, solve for the desired quantity. 
56 . A stuffed animal business  57 . An Ethiopian restaurant  58 . A cell phone factory has a 

has a total cost of has a cost of production cost of production 
production  and a  and 
and a revenue function revenue function a revenue function 

 Find the break-  When does the  What is the 
even point. company start to turn a break-even point? 

profit? 
59 . A musician charges  60 . A guitar factory has a cost 

of production 
where  is the total  If 
number of attendees at the the company needs to 
concert. The venue charges break even after 150 units 
$80 per ticket. After how sold, at what price should 
many people buy tickets they sell each guitar? 
does the venue break even, Round up to the nearest 
and what is the value of dollar, and write the 
the total tickets sold at that revenue function. 
point? 

For the following exercises, use a system of linear equations with two variables and two equations to solve. 
61 . Find two numbers whose  62 . A number is 9 more than  63 . The startup cost for a 

sum is 28 and difference is another number. Twice the restaurant is $120,000, and 
13. sum of the two numbers is each meal costs $10 for the 

10. Find the two numbers. restaurant to make. If each 
meal is then sold for $15, 
after how many meals 
does the restaurant break 
even? 

Access for free at openstax.org



11.1 • Systems of Linear Equations: Two Variables     1019

64 . A moving company  65 . A total of 1,595 first- and  66 . 276 students enrolled in an 
charges a flat rate of $150, second-year college introductory chemistry 
and an additional $5 for students gathered at a pep class. By the end of the 
each box. If a taxi service rally. The number of first- semester, 5 times the 
would charge $20 for each years exceeded the number of students passed 
box, how many boxes number of second-years by as failed. Find the number 
would you need for it to be 15. How many students of students who passed, 
cheaper to use the moving from each year group were and the number of 
company, and what would in attendance? students who failed. 
be the total cost? 

67 . There were 130 faculty at a  68 . A jeep and a pickup truck  69 . If a scientist mixed 10% 
conference. If there were enter a highway running saline solution with 60% 
18 more women than men east-west at the same exit saline solution to get 25 
attending, how many of heading in opposite gallons of 40% saline 
each gender attended the directions. The jeep solution, how many gallons 
conference? entered the highway 30 of 10% and 60% solutions 

minutes before the pickup were mixed? 
did, and traveled 7 mph 
slower than the pickup. 
After 2 hours from the time 
the pickup entered the 
highway, the cars were 
306.5 miles apart. Find the 
speed of each car, 
assuming they were driven 
on cruise control and 
retained the same speed. 

70 . An investor earned triple  71 . An investor invested 1.1  72 . If an investor invests a 
the profits of what they million dollars into two total of $25,000 into two 
earned last year. If they land investments. On the bonds, one that pays 3% 
made $500,000.48 total for first investment, Swan simple interest, and the 
both years, how much did Peak, her return was a other that pays 
the investor earn in profits 110% increase on the interest, and the investor 
each year? money she invested. On earns $737.50 annual 

the second investment, interest, how much was 
Riverside Community, she invested in each account? 
earned 50% over what she 
invested. If she earned $1 
million in profits, how 
much did she invest in 
each of the land deals? 

73 . If an investor invests  74 . Blu-rays cost $5.96 more  75 . A store clerk sold 60 pairs 
$23,000 into two bonds, than regular DVDs at All of sneakers. The high-tops 
one that pays 4% in simple Bets Are Off Electronics. sold for $98.99 and the 
interest, and the other How much would 6 Blu- low-tops sold for $129.99. 
paying 2% simple interest, rays and 2 DVDs cost if 5 If the receipts for the two 
and the investor earns Blu-rays and 2 DVDs cost types of sales totaled 
$710.00 annual interest, $127.73? $6,404.40, how many of 
how much was invested in each type of sneaker were 
each account? sold? 



1020     11 • Systems of Equations and Inequalities

76 . A concert manager  77 . Admission into an 
counted 350 ticket receipts amusement park for 4 
the day after a concert. The children and 2 adults is 
price for a student ticket $116.90. For 6 children and 
was $12.50, and the price 3 adults, the admission is 
for an adult ticket was $175.35. Assuming a 
$16.00. The register different price for children 
confirms that $5,075 was and adults, what is the 
taken in. How many price of the child’s ticket 
student tickets and adult and the price of the adult 
tickets were sold? ticket? 

11.2 Systems of Linear Equations: Three Variables 
Learning Objectives 
In this section, you will: 

Solve systems of three equations in three variables. 
Identify inconsistent systems of equations containing three variables. 
Express the solution of a system of dependent equations containing three variables. 

Figure 1 (credit: “Elembis,” Wikimedia Commons) 
Jordi received an inheritance of $12,000 that he divided into three parts and invested in three ways: in a money-market 
fund paying 3% annual interest; in municipal bonds paying 4% annual interest; and in mutual funds paying 7% annual 
interest. Jordi invested $4,000 more in mutual funds than in municipal bonds. He earned $670 in interest the first year. 
How much did Jordi invest in each type of fund? 
Understanding the correct approach to setting up problems such as this one makes finding a solution a matter of 
following a pattern. We will solve this and similar problems involving three equations and three variables in this section. 
Doing so uses similar techniques as those used to solve systems of two equations in two variables. However, finding 
solutions to systems of three equations requires a bit more organization and a touch of visualization. 

Solving Systems of Three Equations in Three Variables 
In order to solve systems of equations in three variables, known as three-by-three systems, the primary tool we will be 
using is called Gaussian elimination, named after the prolific German mathematician Karl Friedrich Gauss. While there is 
no definitive order in which operations are to be performed, there are specific guidelines as to what type of moves can 
be made. We may number the equations to keep track of the steps we apply. The goal is to eliminate one variable at a 
time to achieve upper triangular form, the ideal form for a three-by-three system because it allows for straightforward 
back-substitution to find a solution  which we call an ordered triple. A system in upper triangular form looks like 
the following: 

The third equation can be solved for  and then we back-substitute to find  and  To write the system in upper 

Access for free at openstax.org



11.2 • Systems of Linear Equations: Three Variables     1021

triangular form, we can perform the following operations: 
1. Interchange the order of any two equations. 
2. Multiply both sides of an equation by a nonzero constant. 
3. Add a nonzero multiple of one equation to another equation. 

The solution set to a three-by-three system is an ordered triple  Graphically, the ordered triple defines the 
point that is the intersection of three planes in space. You can visualize such an intersection by imagining any corner in a 
rectangular room. A corner is defined by three planes: two adjoining walls and the floor (or ceiling). Any point where two 
walls and the floor meet represents the intersection of three planes. 

Number of Possible Solutions 

Figure 2 and Figure 3 illustrate possible solution scenarios for three-by-three systems. 

• Systems that have a single solution are those which, after elimination, result in a solution set consisting of an 
ordered triple  Graphically, the ordered triple defines a point that is the intersection of three planes in 
space. 

• Systems that have an infinite number of solutions are those which, after elimination, result in an expression that 
is always true, such as  Graphically, an infinite number of solutions represents a line or coincident plane 
that serves as the intersection of three planes in space. 

• Systems that have no solution are those that, after elimination, result in a statement that is a contradiction, such 
as  Graphically, a system with no solution is represented by three planes with no point in common. 

Figure 2 (a)Three planes intersect at a single point, representing a three-by-three system with a single solution. (b) 
Three planes intersect in a line, representing a three-by-three system with infinite solutions. 

Figure 3 All three figures represent three-by-three systems with no solution. (a) The three planes intersect with each 
other, but not at a common point. (b) Two of the planes are parallel and intersect with the third plane, but not with 
each other. (c) All three planes are parallel, so there is no point of intersection. 

EXAMPLE 1 

Determining Whether an Ordered Triple Is a Solution to a System 
Determine whether the ordered triple  is a solution to the system. 



1022     11 • Systems of Equations and Inequalities

Solution 
We will check each equation by substituting in the values of the ordered triple for  and 

The ordered triple  is indeed a solution to the system. 

...
HOW TO 

Given a linear system of three equations, solve for three unknowns. 

1. Pick any pair of equations and solve for one variable. 
2. Pick another pair of equations and solve for the same variable. 
3. You have created a system of two equations in two unknowns. Solve the resulting two-by-two system. 
4. Back-substitute known variables into any one of the original equations and solve for the missing variable. 

EXAMPLE 2 

Solving a System of Three Equations in Three Variables by Elimination 
Find a solution to the following system: 

Solution 
There will always be several choices as to where to begin, but the most obvious first step here is to eliminate  by adding 
equations (1) and (2). 

The second step is multiplying equation (1) by  and adding the result to equation (3). These two steps will eliminate 
the variable 

In equations (4) and (5), we have created a new two-by-two system. We can solve for  by adding the two equations. 

Choosing one equation from each new system, we obtain the upper triangular form: 

Access for free at openstax.org



11.2 • Systems of Linear Equations: Three Variables     1023

Next, we back-substitute  into equation (4) and solve for 

Finally, we can back-substitute  and  into equation (1). This will yield the solution for 

The solution is the ordered triple  See Figure 4. 

Figure 4 

EXAMPLE 3 

Solving a Real-World Problem Using a System of Three Equations in Three Variables 
In the problem posed at the beginning of the section, Jordi invested his inheritance of $12,000 in three different funds: 
part in a money-market fund paying 3% interest annually; part in municipal bonds paying 4% annually; and the rest in 
mutual funds paying 7% annually. Jordi invested $4,000 more in mutual funds than he invested in municipal bonds. The 
total interest earned in one year was $670. How much did he invest in each type of fund? 

Solution 
To solve this problem, we use all of the information given and set up three equations. First, we assign a variable to each 
of the three investment amounts: 

The first equation indicates that the sum of the three principal amounts is $12,000. 

We form the second equation according to the information that Jordi invested $4,000 more in mutual funds than he 
invested in municipal bonds. 

The third equation shows that the total amount of interest earned from each fund equals $670. 

Then, we write the three equations as a system. 

To make the calculations simpler, we can multiply the third equation by 100. Thus, 



1024     11 • Systems of Equations and Inequalities

Step 1. Interchange equation (2) and equation (3) so that the two equations with three variables will line up. 

Step 2. Multiply equation (1) by  and add to equation (2). Write the result as row 2. 

Step 3. Add equation (2) to equation (3) and write the result as equation (3). 

Step 4. Solve for  in equation (3). Back-substitute that value in equation (2) and solve for  Then, back-substitute the 
values for  and  into equation (1) and solve for 

Jordi invested $2,000 in a money-market fund, $3,000 in municipal bonds, and $7,000 in mutual funds. 

 TRY IT #1 Solve the system of equations in three variables. 

Identifying Inconsistent Systems of Equations Containing Three Variables 
Just as with systems of equations in two variables, we may come across an inconsistent system of equations in three 
variables, which means that it does not have a solution that satisfies all three equations. The equations could represent 
three parallel planes, two parallel planes and one intersecting plane, or three planes that intersect the other two but not 
at the same location. The process of elimination will result in a false statement, such as  or some other 
contradiction. 

EXAMPLE 4 

Solving an Inconsistent System of Three Equations in Three Variables 
Solve the following system. 

Access for free at openstax.org



11.2 • Systems of Linear Equations: Three Variables     1025

Solution 
Looking at the coefficients of  we can see that we can eliminate  by adding equation (1) to equation (2). 

Next, we multiply equation (1) by  and add it to equation (3). 

Then, we multiply equation (4) by 2 and add it to equation (5). 

The final equation  is a contradiction, so we conclude that the system of equations in inconsistent and, therefore, 
has no solution. 

Analysis 
In this system, each plane intersects the other two, but not at the same location. Therefore, the system is inconsistent. 

 TRY IT #2 Solve the system of three equations in three variables. 

Expressing the Solution of a System of Dependent Equations Containing Three 
Variables 
We know from working with systems of equations in two variables that a dependent system of equations has an infinite 
number of solutions. The same is true for dependent systems of equations in three variables. An infinite number of 
solutions can result from several situations. The three planes could be the same, so that a solution to one equation will 
be the solution to the other two equations. All three equations could be different but they intersect on a line, which has 
infinite solutions. Or two of the equations could be the same and intersect the third on a line. 

EXAMPLE 5 

Finding the Solution to a Dependent System of Equations 
Find the solution to the given system of three equations in three variables. 

Solution 
First, we can multiply equation (1) by  and add it to equation (2). 



1026     11 • Systems of Equations and Inequalities

​ ​ ​ ​

We do not need to proceed any further. The result we get is an identity,  which tells us that this system has an 
infinite number of solutions. There are other ways to begin to solve this system, such as multiplying equation (3) by 
and adding it to equation (1). We then perform the same steps as above and find the same result, 
When a system is dependent, we can find general expressions for the solutions. Adding equations (1) and (3), we have 

We then solve the resulting equation for 

We back-substitute the expression for  into one of the equations and solve for 

So the general solution is  In this solution,  can be any real number. The values of  and  are dependent 
on the value selected for 

Analysis 
As shown in Figure 5, two of the planes are the same and they intersect the third plane on a line. The solution set is 
infinite, as all points along the intersection line will satisfy all three equations. 

Figure 5 

 Q&A Does the generic solution to a dependent system always have to be written in terms of 

No, you can write the generic solution in terms of any of the variables, but it is common to write it in 
terms of x and if needed  and 

 TRY IT #3 Solve the following system. 

Access for free at openstax.org



11.2 • Systems of Linear Equations: Three Variables     1027

 MEDIA 

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with systems of equations in three variables. 

Ex 1: System of Three Equations with Three Unknowns Using Elimination (https://openstax.org/l/systhree) 
Ex. 2: System of Three Equations with Three Unknowns Using Elimination (https://openstax.org/l/systhelim) 

 11.2 SECTION EXERCISES 
Verbal 

1 . Can a linear system of three  2 . If a given ordered triple  3 . If a given ordered triple 
equations have exactly two solves the system of does not solve the system of 
solutions? Explain why or equations, is that solution equations, is there no 
why not unique? If so, explain why. If solution? If so, explain why. 

not, give an example where If not, give an example. 
it is not unique. 

4 . Using the method of  5 . Can you explain whether 
addition, is there only one there can be only one 
way to solve the system? method to solve a linear 

system of equations? If yes, 
give an example of such a 
system of equations. If not, 
explain why not. 

Algebraic 

For the following exercises, determine whether the ordered triple given is the solution to the system of equations. 

6 .  and  7 .  and 

8 .  and  9 .  and 

10 .  and 

For the following exercises, solve each system by elimination. 

11 .  12 .  13 . 

14 .  15 .  16 . 

For the following exercises, solve each system by Gaussian elimination. 

17 .  18 .  19 . 



1028     11 • Systems of Equations and Inequalities

20 .  21 .  22 . 

23 .  24 .  25 . 

26 .  27 .  28 . 

29 .  30 .  31 . 

32 .  33 .  34 . 

35 .  36 .  37 . 

38 .  39 .  40 . 

41 .  42 .  43 . 

44 .  45 . 

Extensions 

For the following exercises, solve the system for  and 

46 .  47 .  48 . 

49 .  50 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



11.2 • Systems of Linear Equations: Three Variables     1029

Real-World Applications 

51 . Three even numbers sum  52 . Three numbers sum up to  53 . At a family reunion, there 
up to 108. The smaller is 147. The smallest number were only blood relatives, 
half the larger and the is half the middle number, consisting of children, 
middle number is  the which is half the largest parents, and grandparents, 
larger. What are the three number. What are the in attendance. There were 
numbers? three numbers? 400 people total. There 

were twice as many 
parents as grandparents, 
and 50 more children than 
parents. How many 
children, parents, and 
grandparents were in 
attendance? 

54 . An animal shelter has a  55 . Your roommate, Shani,  56 . Your roommate, John, 
total of 350 animals offered to buy groceries for offered to buy household 
comprised of cats, dogs, you and your other supplies for you and your 
and rabbits. If the number roommate. The total bill other roommate. You live 
of rabbits is 5 less than was $82. She forgot to save near the border of three 
one-half the number of the individual receipts but states, each of which has a 
cats, and there are 20 more remembered that your different sales tax. The 
cats than dogs, how many groceries were $0.05 total amount of money 
of each animal are at the cheaper than half of her spent was $100.75. Your 
shelter? groceries, and that your supplies were bought with 

other roommate’s 5% tax, John’s with 8% tax, 
groceries were $2.10 more and your third roommate’s 
than your groceries. How with 9% sales tax. The total 
much was each of your amount of money spent 
share of the groceries? without taxes is $93.50. If 

your supplies before tax 
were $1 more than half of 
what your third 
roommate’s supplies were 
before tax, how much did 
each of you spend? Give 
your answer both with and 
without taxes. 

57 . Three coworkers work for  58 . At a carnival, $2,914.25 in  59 . A local band sells out for 
the same employer. Their receipts were taken at the their concert. They sell all 
jobs are warehouse end of the day. The cost of 1,175 tickets for a total 
manager, office manager, a child’s ticket was $20.50, purse of $28,112.50. The 
and truck driver. The sum an adult ticket was $29.75, tickets were priced at $20 
of the annual salaries of and a senior citizen ticket for student tickets, $22.50 
the warehouse manager was $15.25. There were for children, and $29 for 
and office manager is twice as many senior adult tickets. If the band 
$82,000. The office citizens as adults in sold twice as many adult as 
manager makes $4,000 attendance, and 20 more children tickets, how many 
more than the truck driver children than senior of each type was sold? 
annually. The annual citizens. How many 
salaries of the warehouse children, adult, and senior 
manager and the truck citizen tickets were sold? 
driver total $78,000. What 
is the annual salary of each 
of the co-workers? 



1030     11 • Systems of Equations and Inequalities

60 . In a bag, a child has 325  61 . Last year, at Haven’s Pond  62 . When his youngest child 
coins worth $19.50. There Car Dealership, for a moved out, Deandre sold 
were three types of coins: particular model of BMW, his home and made three 
pennies, nickels, and Jeep, and Toyota, one could investments using gains 
dimes. If the bag contained purchase all three cars for from the sale. He invested 
the same number of a total of $140,000. This $80,500 into three 
nickels as dimes, how year, due to inflation, the accounts, one that paid 4% 
many of each type of coin same cars would cost simple interest, one that 
was in the bag? $151,830. The cost of the paid  simple interest, 

BMW increased by 8%, the and one that paid 
Jeep by 5%, and the Toyota simple interest. He earned 
by 12%. If the price of last $2,670 interest at the end 
year’s Jeep was $7,000 less of one year. If the amount 
than the price of last year’s of the money invested in 
BMW, what was the price the second account was 
of each of the three cars four times the amount 
last year? invested in the third 

account, how much was 
invested in each account? 

63 . You inherit one million  64 . An entrepreneur sells a  65 . The top three countries in 
dollars. You invest it all in portion of their business oil consumption in a 
three accounts for one for one hundred thousand certain year are as follows: 
year. The first account pays dollars and invests it all in the United States, Japan, 
3% compounded annually, three accounts for one and China. In millions of 
the second account pays year. The first account pays barrels per day, the three 
4% compounded annually, 4% compounded annually, top countries consumed 
and the third account pays the second account pays 39.8% of the world’s 
2% compounded annually. 3% compounded annually, consumed oil. The United 
After one year, you earn and the third account pays States consumed 0.7% 
$34,000 in interest. If you 2% compounded annually. more than four times 
invest four times the After one year, the China’s consumption. The 
money into the account entrepreneur earns $3,650 United States consumed 
that pays 3% compared to in interest. If they invested 5% more than triple Japan’s 
2%, how much did you five times the money in the consumption. What 
invest in each account? account that pays 4% percent of the world oil 

compared to 3%, how consumption did the 
much did they invest in United States, Japan, and 
each account? China consume?1 

1 “Oil reserves, production and consumption in 2001,” accessed April 6, 2014, http://scaruffi.com/politics/oil.html. 

Access for free at openstax.org



11.3 • Systems of Nonlinear Equations and Inequalities: Two Variables     1031

66 . The top three countries in  67 . The top three sources of oil  68 . The top three oil producers 
oil production in the same imports for the United in the United States in a 
year are Saudi Arabia, the States in the same year certain year are the Gulf of 
United States, and Russia. were Saudi Arabia, Mexico, Mexico, Texas, and Alaska. 
In millions of barrels per and Canada. The three top The three regions were 
day, the top three countries accounted for responsible for 64% of the 
countries produced 31.4% 47% of oil imports. The United States oil 
of the world’s produced oil. United States imported production. The Gulf of 
Saudi Arabia and the 1.8% more from Saudi Mexico and Texas 
United States combined for Arabia than they did from combined for 47% of oil 
22.1% of the world’s Mexico, and 1.7% more production. Texas 
production, and Saudi from Saudi Arabia than produced 3% more than 
Arabia produced 2% more they did from Canada. Alaska. What percent of 
oil than Russia. What What percent of the United United States oil 
percent of the world oil States oil imports were production came from 
production did Saudi from these three these regions?4 

Arabia, the United States, countries?3 

and Russia produce?2 

69 . At one time, in the United  70 . Meat consumption in the 
States, 398 species of United States can be 
animals were on the broken into three 
endangered species list. categories: red meat, 
The top groups were poultry, and fish. If fish 
mammals, birds, and fish, makes up 4% less than 
which comprised 55% of one-quarter of poultry 
the endangered species. consumption, and red 
Birds accounted for 0.7% meat consumption is 
more than fish, and fish 18.2% higher than poultry 
accounted for 1.5% more consumption, what are the 
than mammals. What percentages of meat 
percent of the endangered consumption?5 

species came from 
mammals, birds, and fish? 

11.3 Systems of Nonlinear Equations and Inequalities: Two Variables 
Learning Objectives 
In this section, you will: 

Solve a system of nonlinear equations using substitution. 
Solve a system of nonlinear equations using elimination. 
Graph a nonlinear inequality. 
Graph a system of nonlinear inequalities. 

Halley’s Comet (Figure 1) orbits the sun about once every 75 years. Its path can be considered to be a very elongated 
ellipse. Other comets follow similar paths in space. These orbital paths can be studied using systems of equations. These 
systems, however, are different from the ones we considered in the previous section because the equations are not 
linear. 

2 “Oil reserves, production and consumption in 2001,” accessed April 6, 2014, http://scaruffi.com/politics/oil.html. 
3 “Oil reserves, production and consumption in 2001,” accessed April 6, 2014, http://scaruffi.com/politics/oil.html. 
4 “USA: The coming global oil crisis,” accessed April 6, 2014, http://www.oilcrisis.com/us/. 
5 “The United States Meat Industry at a Glance,” accessed April 6, 2014, http://www.meatami.com/ht/d/sp/i/47465/pid/47465. 



1032     11 • Systems of Equations and Inequalities

Figure 1 Halley’s Comet (credit: "NASA Blueshift"/Flickr) 
In this section, we will consider the intersection of a parabola and a line, a circle and a line, and a circle and an ellipse. 
The methods for solving systems of nonlinear equations are similar to those for linear equations. 

Solving a System of Nonlinear Equations Using Substitution 
A system of nonlinear equations is a system of two or more equations in two or more variables containing at least one 
equation that is not linear. Recall that a linear equation can take the form  Any equation that cannot be 
written in this form is nonlinear. The substitution method we used for linear systems is the same method we will use for 
nonlinear systems. We solve one equation for one variable and then substitute the result into the second equation to 
solve for another variable, and so on. There is, however, a variation in the possible outcomes. 

Intersection of a Parabola and a Line 
There are three possible types of solutions for a system of nonlinear equations involving a parabola and a line. 

Possible Types of Solutions for Points of Intersection of a Parabola and a Line 

Figure 2 illustrates possible solution sets for a system of equations involving a parabola and a line. 

• No solution. The line will never intersect the parabola. 
• One solution. The line is tangent to the parabola and intersects the parabola at exactly one point. 
• Two solutions. The line crosses on the inside of the parabola and intersects the parabola at two points. 

Figure 2 

...
HOW TO 

Given a system of equations containing a line and a parabola, find the solution. 

1. Solve the linear equation for one of the variables. 
2. Substitute the expression obtained in step one into the parabola equation. 
3. Solve for the remaining variable. 
4. Check your solutions in both equations. 

Access for free at openstax.org



11.3 • Systems of Nonlinear Equations and Inequalities: Two Variables     1033

EXAMPLE 1 

Solving a System of Nonlinear Equations Representing a Parabola and a Line 
Solve the system of equations. 

Solution 
Solve the first equation for  and then substitute the resulting expression into the second equation. 

Expand the equation and set it equal to zero. 

Solving for  gives  and  Next, substitute each value for  into the first equation to solve for  Always 
substitute the value into the linear equation to check for extraneous solutions. 

The solutions are  and  which can be verified by substituting these  values into both of the original 
equations. See Figure 3. 

Figure 3 

 Q&A Could we have substituted values for  into the second equation to solve for  in Example 1? 

Yes, but because  is squared in the second equation this could give us extraneous solutions for 

For 



1034     11 • Systems of Equations and Inequalities

This gives us the same value as in the solution. 

For 

Notice that  is an extraneous solution. 

 TRY IT #1 Solve the given system of equations by substitution. 

Intersection of a Circle and a Line 
Just as with a parabola and a line, there are three possible outcomes when solving a system of equations representing a 
circle and a line. 

Possible Types of Solutions for the Points of Intersection of a Circle and a Line 

Figure 4 illustrates possible solution sets for a system of equations involving a circle and a line. 

• No solution. The line does not intersect the circle. 
• One solution. The line is tangent to the circle and intersects the circle at exactly one point. 
• Two solutions. The line crosses the circle and intersects it at two points. 

Figure 4 

...
HOW TO 

Given a system of equations containing a line and a circle, find the solution. 

1. Solve the linear equation for one of the variables. 
2. Substitute the expression obtained in step one into the equation for the circle. 
3. Solve for the remaining variable. 
4. Check your solutions in both equations. 

Access for free at openstax.org



11.3 • Systems of Nonlinear Equations and Inequalities: Two Variables     1035

EXAMPLE 2 

Finding the Intersection of a Circle and a Line by Substitution 
Find the intersection of the given circle and the given line by substitution. 

Solution 
One of the equations has already been solved for  We will substitute  into the equation for the circle. 

Now, we factor and solve for 

Substitute the two x-values into the original linear equation to solve for 

The line intersects the circle at  and  which can be verified by substituting these  values into both of 
the original equations. See Figure 5. 

Figure 5 

 TRY IT #2 Solve the system of nonlinear equations. 

Solving a System of Nonlinear Equations Using Elimination 
We have seen that substitution is often the preferred method when a system of equations includes a linear equation and 
a nonlinear equation. However, when both equations in the system have like variables of the second degree, solving 
them using elimination by addition is often easier than substitution. Generally, elimination is a far simpler method when 



1036     11 • Systems of Equations and Inequalities

the system involves only two equations in two variables (a two-by-two system), rather than a three-by-three system, as 
there are fewer steps. As an example, we will investigate the possible types of solutions when solving a system of 
equations representing a circle and an ellipse. 

Possible Types of Solutions for the Points of Intersection of a Circle and an Ellipse 

Figure 6 illustrates possible solution sets for a system of equations involving a circle and an ellipse. 

• No solution. The circle and ellipse do not intersect. One shape is inside the other or the circle and the ellipse are a 
distance away from the other. 

• One solution. The circle and ellipse are tangent to each other, and intersect at exactly one point. 
• Two solutions. The circle and the ellipse intersect at two points. 
• Three solutions. The circle and the ellipse intersect at three points. 
• Four solutions. The circle and the ellipse intersect at four points. 

Figure 6 

EXAMPLE 3 

Solving a System of Nonlinear Equations Representing a Circle and an Ellipse 
Solve the system of nonlinear equations. 

Solution 
Let’s begin by multiplying equation (1) by  and adding it to equation (2). 

After we add the two equations together, we solve for 

Substitute  into one of the equations and solve for 

Access for free at openstax.org



11.3 • Systems of Nonlinear Equations and Inequalities: Two Variables     1037

There are four solutions:  See Figure 7. 

Figure 7 

 TRY IT #3 Find the solution set for the given system of nonlinear equations. 

Graphing a Nonlinear Inequality 
All of the equations in the systems that we have encountered so far have involved equalities, but we may also encounter 
systems that involve inequalities. We have already learned to graph linear inequalities by graphing the corresponding 
equation, and then shading the region represented by the inequality symbol. Now, we will follow similar steps to graph a 
nonlinear inequality so that we can learn to solve systems of nonlinear inequalities. A nonlinear inequality is an 
inequality containing a nonlinear expression. Graphing a nonlinear inequality is much like graphing a linear inequality. 
Recall that when the inequality is greater than,  or less than,  the graph is drawn with a dashed line. When 
the inequality is greater than or equal to,  or less than or equal to,  the graph is drawn with a solid line. The 
graphs will create regions in the plane, and we will test each region for a solution. If one point in the region works, the 
whole region works. That is the region we shade. See Figure 8. 



1038     11 • Systems of Equations and Inequalities

Figure 8 (a) an example of  (b) an example of  (c) an example of  (d) an example of 
...

HOW TO 

Given an inequality bounded by a parabola, sketch a graph. 

1. Graph the parabola as if it were an equation. This is the boundary for the region that is the solution set. 
2. If the boundary is included in the region (the operator is  or  ), the parabola is graphed as a solid line. 
3. If the boundary is not included in the region (the operator is < or >), the parabola is graphed as a dashed line. 
4. Test a point in one of the regions to determine whether it satisfies the inequality statement. If the statement is 

true, the solution set is the region including the point. If the statement is false, the solution set is the region on 
the other side of the boundary line. 

5. Shade the region representing the solution set. 

EXAMPLE 4 

Graphing an Inequality for a Parabola 
Graph the inequality 

Solution 

First, graph the corresponding equation  Since  has a greater than symbol, we draw the graph 
with a dashed line. Then we choose points to test both inside and outside the parabola. Let’s test the points 

 and  One point is clearly inside the parabola and the other point is clearly outside. 

The graph is shown in Figure 9. We can see that the solution set consists of all points inside the parabola, but not on the 
graph itself. 

Access for free at openstax.org



11.3 • Systems of Nonlinear Equations and Inequalities: Two Variables     1039

Figure 9 

Graphing a System of Nonlinear Inequalities 
Now that we have learned to graph nonlinear inequalities, we can learn how to graph systems of nonlinear inequalities. 
A system of nonlinear inequalities is a system of two or more inequalities in two or more variables containing at least 
one inequality that is not linear. Graphing a system of nonlinear inequalities is similar to graphing a system of linear 
inequalities. The difference is that our graph may result in more shaded regions that represent a solution than we find in 
a system of linear inequalities. The solution to a nonlinear system of inequalities is the region of the graph where the 
shaded regions of the graph of each inequality overlap, or where the regions intersect, called the feasible region. 

...
HOW TO 

Given a system of nonlinear inequalities, sketch a graph. 

1. Find the intersection points by solving the corresponding system of nonlinear equations. 
2. Graph the nonlinear equations. 
3. Find the shaded regions of each inequality. 
4. Identify the feasible region as the intersection of the shaded regions of each inequality or the set of points 

common to each inequality. 

EXAMPLE 5 

Graphing a System of Inequalities 
Graph the given system of inequalities. 

Solution 
These two equations are clearly parabolas. We can find the points of intersection by the elimination process: Add both 
equations and the variable  will be eliminated. Then we solve for 

Substitute the x-values into one of the equations and solve for 



1040     11 • Systems of Equations and Inequalities

The two points of intersection are  and  Notice that the equations can be rewritten as follows. 

Graph each inequality. See Figure 10. The feasible region is the region between the two equations bounded by 
 on the top and  on the bottom. 

Figure 10 

 TRY IT #4 Graph the given system of inequalities. 

 MEDIA 

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with nonlinear equations. 

Solve a System of Nonlinear Equations Using Substitution (https://openstax.org/l/nonlinsub) 
Solve a System of Nonlinear Equations Using Elimination (https://openstax.org/l/nonlinelim) 

Access for free at openstax.org



11.3 • Systems of Nonlinear Equations and Inequalities: Two Variables     1041

 11.3 SECTION EXERCISES 
Verbal 

1 . Explain whether a system of  2 . When graphing an  3 . When you graph a system of 
two nonlinear equations can inequality, explain why we inequalities, will there 
have exactly two solutions. only need to test one point always be a feasible region? 
What about exactly three? If to determine whether an If so, explain why. If not, 
not, explain why not. If so, entire region is the solution? give an example of a graph 
give an example of such a of inequalities that does not 
system, in graph form, and have a feasible region. Why 
explain why your choice does it not have a feasible 
gives two or three answers. region? 

4 . If you graph a revenue and  5 . If you perform your break-
cost function, explain how to even analysis and there is 
determine in what regions more than one solution, 
there is profit. explain how you would 

determine which x-values 
are profit and which are not. 

Algebraic 

For the following exercises, solve the system of nonlinear equations using substitution. 

6 .  7 .  8 . 

9 .  10 . 

For the following exercises, solve the system of nonlinear equations using elimination. 

11 .  12 .  13 . 

14 .  15 . 

For the following exercises, use any method to solve the system of nonlinear equations. 

16 .  17 .  18 . 

19 .  20 .  21 . 

22 .  23 . 

For the following exercises, use any method to solve the nonlinear system. 

24 .  25 .  26 . 

27 .  28 .  29 . 



1042     11 • Systems of Equations and Inequalities

30 .  31 .  32 . 

33 .  34 .  35 . 

36 .  37 .  38 . 

Graphical 

For the following exercises, graph the inequality. 

39 . 40 . 

For the following exercises, graph the system of inequalities. Label all points of intersection. 

41 . 42 .  43 . 

44 .  45 . 

Extensions 

For the following exercises, graph the inequality. 

46 .  47 . 

For the following exercises, find the solutions to the nonlinear equations with two variables. 

48 .  49 .  50 . 

51 .  52 . 

Technology 

For the following exercises, solve the system of inequalities. Use a calculator to graph the system to confirm the answer. 

53 .  54 . 

Real-World Applications 

For the following exercises, construct a system of nonlinear equations to describe the given behavior, then solve for the 
requested solutions. 
55 . Two numbers add up to  56 . The squares of two 

300. One number is twice numbers add to 360. The 
the square of the other second number is half the 
number. What are the value of the first number 
numbers? squared. What are the 

numbers? 

Access for free at openstax.org



11.4 • Partial Fractions     1043

57 . A laptop company has discovered their cost and  58 . A cell phone company has the following cost and 
revenue functions for each day: revenue functions: 

 and and  What is the range of 
 If they want to make a cell phones they should produce each day so 

profit, what is the range of laptops per day that there is profit? Round to the nearest number that 
they should produce? Round to the nearest generates profit. 
number which would generate profit. 

11.4 Partial Fractions 
Learning Objectives 
In this section, you will: 

Decompose    , where    has only nonrepeated linear factors. 
Decompose    , where      has repeated linear factors. 
Decompose    , where    has a nonrepeated irreducible quadratic factor. 
Decompose    , where    has a repeated irreducible quadratic factor. 

Earlier in this chapter, we studied systems of two equations in two variables, systems of three equations in three 
variables, and nonlinear systems. Here we introduce another way that systems of equations can be utilized—the 
decomposition of rational expressions. 
Fractions can be complicated; adding a variable in the denominator makes them even more so. The methods studied in 
this section will help simplify the concept of a rational expression. 

Decomposing  Where Q(x) Has Only Nonrepeated Linear Factors 
Recall the algebra regarding adding and subtracting rational expressions. These operations depend on finding a 
common denominator so that we can write the sum or difference as a single, simplified rational expression. In this 
section, we will look at partial fraction decomposition, which is the undoing of the procedure to add or subtract rational 
expressions. In other words, it is a return from the single simplified rational expression to the original expressions, called 
the partial fraction. 
For example, suppose we add the following fractions: 

We would first need to find a common denominator, 
Next, we would write each expression with this common denominator and find the sum of the terms. 

Partial fraction decomposition is the reverse of this procedure. We would start with the solution and rewrite (decompose) 
it as the sum of two fractions. 

We will investigate rational expressions with linear factors and quadratic factors in the denominator where the degree of 
the numerator is less than the degree of the denominator. Regardless of the type of expression we are decomposing, the 
first and most important thing to do is factor the denominator. 
When the denominator of the simplified expression contains distinct linear factors, it is likely that each of the original 
rational expressions, which were added or subtracted, had one of the linear factors as the denominator. In other words, 
using the example above, the factors of  are  the denominators of the decomposed rational 
expression. So we will rewrite the simplified form as the sum of individual fractions and use a variable for each 
numerator. Then, we will solve for each numerator using one of several methods available for partial fraction 



1044     11 • Systems of Equations and Inequalities

decomposition. 

Partial Fraction Decomposition of  Has Nonrepeated Linear Factors 

The partial fraction decomposition of  when  has nonrepeated linear factors and the degree of  is less 
than the degree of  is 

...
HOW TO 

Given a rational expression with distinct linear factors in the denominator, decompose it. 

1. Use a variable for the original numerators, usually    or  depending on the number of factors, placing 
each variable over a single factor. For the purpose of this definition, we use  for each numerator 

2. Multiply both sides of the equation by the common denominator to eliminate fractions. 
3. Expand the right side of the equation and collect like terms. 
4. Set coefficients of like terms from the left side of the equation equal to those on the right side to create a system 

of equations to solve for the numerators. 

EXAMPLE 1 

Decomposing a Rational Function with Distinct Linear Factors 
Decompose the given rational expression with distinct linear factors. 

Solution 
We will separate the denominator factors and give each numerator a symbolic label, like  or 

Multiply both sides of the equation by the common denominator to eliminate the fractions: 

The resulting equation is 

Expand the right side of the equation and collect like terms. 

Set up a system of equations associating corresponding coefficients. 

Add the two equations and solve for 

Access for free at openstax.org



11.4 • Partial Fractions     1045

Substitute  into one of the original equations in the system. 

Thus, the partial fraction decomposition is 

Another method to use to solve for  or  is by considering the equation that resulted from eliminating the fractions 
and substituting a value for  that will make either the A- or B-term equal 0. If we let  the 

 term becomes 0 and we can simply solve for 

Next, either substitute  into the equation and solve for  or make the B-term 0 by substituting  into the 
equation. 

We obtain the same values for  and  using either method, so the decompositions are the same using either method. 

Although this method is not seen very often in textbooks, we present it here as an alternative that may make some 
partial fraction decompositions easier. It is known as the Heaviside method, named after Charles Heaviside, a pioneer in 
the study of electronics. 

 TRY IT #1 Find the partial fraction decomposition of the following expression. 

Decomposing  Where Q(x) Has Repeated Linear Factors 
Some fractions we may come across are special cases that we can decompose into partial fractions with repeated linear 
factors. We must remember that we account for repeated factors by writing each factor in increasing powers. 

Partial Fraction Decomposition of  Has Repeated Linear Factors 

The partial fraction decomposition of  when  has a repeated linear factor occurring  times and the degree 
of  is less than the degree of  is 



1046     11 • Systems of Equations and Inequalities

Write the denominator powers in increasing order. 

...
HOW TO 

Given a rational expression with repeated linear factors, decompose it. 

1. Use a variable like  or  for the numerators and account for increasing powers of the denominators. 

2. Multiply both sides of the equation by the common denominator to eliminate fractions. 
3. Expand the right side of the equation and collect like terms. 
4. Set coefficients of like terms from the left side of the equation equal to those on the right side to create a system 

of equations to solve for the numerators. 

EXAMPLE 2 

Decomposing with Repeated Linear Factors 
Decompose the given rational expression with repeated linear factors. 

Solution 
The denominator factors are  To allow for the repeated factor of  the decomposition will include three 
denominators:  and  Thus, 

Next, we multiply both sides by the common denominator. 

On the right side of the equation, we expand and collect like terms. 

Next, we compare the coefficients of both sides. This will give the system of equations in three variables: 

Solving for  , we have 

Substitute  into equation (1). 

Access for free at openstax.org



11.4 • Partial Fractions     1047

Then, to solve for  substitute the values for  and  into equation (2). 

Thus, 

 TRY IT #2 Find the partial fraction decomposition of the expression with repeated linear factors. 

Decomposing  Where Q(x) Has a Nonrepeated Irreducible Quadratic Factor 
So far, we have performed partial fraction decomposition with expressions that have had linear factors in the 
denominator, and we applied numerators  or  representing constants. Now we will look at an example where 
one of the factors in the denominator is a quadratic expression that does not factor. This is referred to as an irreducible 
quadratic factor. In cases like this, we use a linear numerator such as  etc. 

Decomposition of  Has a Nonrepeated Irreducible Quadratic Factor 

The partial fraction decomposition of  such that  has a nonrepeated irreducible quadratic factor and 
the degree of  is less than the degree of  is written as 

The decomposition may contain more rational expressions if there are linear factors. Each linear factor will have a 
different constant numerator:  and so on. 

...
HOW TO 

Given a rational expression where the factors of the denominator are distinct, irreducible quadratic factors, 
decompose it. 

1. Use variables such as  or  for the constant numerators over linear factors, and linear expressions 
such as  etc., for the numerators of each quadratic factor in the denominator. 

2. Multiply both sides of the equation by the common denominator to eliminate fractions. 
3. Expand the right side of the equation and collect like terms. 
4. Set coefficients of like terms from the left side of the equation equal to those on the right side to create a system 

of equations to solve for the numerators. 



1048     11 • Systems of Equations and Inequalities

EXAMPLE 3 

Decomposing  When Q(x) Contains a Nonrepeated Irreducible Quadratic Factor 
Find a partial fraction decomposition of the given expression. 

Solution 
We have one linear factor and one irreducible quadratic factor in the denominator, so one numerator will be a constant 
and the other numerator will be a linear expression. Thus, 

We follow the same steps as in previous problems. First, clear the fractions by multiplying both sides of the equation by 
the common denominator. 

Notice we could easily solve for  by choosing a value for  that will make the  term equal 0. Let 
and substitute it into the equation. 

Now that we know the value of  substitute it back into the equation. Then expand the right side and collect like 
terms. 

Setting the coefficients of terms on the right side equal to the coefficients of terms on the left side gives the system of 
equations. 

Solve for  using equation (1) and solve for  using equation (3). 

Thus, the partial fraction decomposition of the expression is 

Access for free at openstax.org



11.4 • Partial Fractions     1049

 Q&A Could we have just set up a system of equations to solve Example 3? 

Yes, we could have solved it by setting up a system of equations without solving for  first. The 
expansion on the right would be: 

So the system of equations would be: 

 TRY IT #3 Find the partial fraction decomposition of the expression with a nonrepeating irreducible 
quadratic factor. 

Decomposing  When Q(x) Has a Repeated Irreducible Quadratic Factor 
Now that we can decompose a simplified rational expression with an irreducible quadratic factor, we will learn how to do 
partial fraction decomposition when the simplified rational expression has repeated irreducible quadratic factors. The 
decomposition will consist of partial fractions with linear numerators over each irreducible quadratic factor represented 
in increasing powers. 

Decomposition of  When Q(x) Has a Repeated Irreducible Quadratic Factor 

The partial fraction decomposition of  when  has a repeated irreducible quadratic factor and the 
degree of  is less than the degree of  is 

Write the denominators in increasing powers. 

...
HOW TO 

Given a rational expression that has a repeated irreducible factor, decompose it. 

1. Use variables like  or  for the constant numerators over linear factors, and linear expressions such as 
 etc., for the numerators of each quadratic factor in the denominator written in 

increasing powers, such as 

2. Multiply both sides of the equation by the common denominator to eliminate fractions. 
3. Expand the right side of the equation and collect like terms. 
4. Set coefficients of like terms from the left side of the equation equal to those on the right side to create a system 

of equations to solve for the numerators. 



1050     11 • Systems of Equations and Inequalities

EXAMPLE 4 

Decomposing a Rational Function with a Repeated Irreducible Quadratic Factor in the Denominator 
Decompose the given expression that has a repeated irreducible factor in the denominator. 

Solution 
The factors of the denominator are  and  Recall that, when a factor in the denominator is a 
quadratic that includes at least two terms, the numerator must be of the linear form  So, let’s begin the 
decomposition. 

We eliminate the denominators by multiplying each term by  Thus, 

Expand the right side. 

Now we will collect like terms. 

Set up the system of equations matching corresponding coefficients on each side of the equal sign. 

We can use substitution from this point. Substitute  into the first equation. 

Substitute  and  into the third equation. 

Substitute  into the fourth equation. 

Now we have solved for all of the unknowns on the right side of the equal sign. We have    
and  We can write the decomposition as follows: 

 TRY IT #4 Find the partial fraction decomposition of the expression with a repeated irreducible quadratic 
factor. 

Access for free at openstax.org



11.4 • Partial Fractions     1051

 MEDIA 

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with partial fractions. 

Partial Fraction Decomposition (https://openstax.org/l/partdecomp) 
Partial Fraction Decomposition With Repeated Linear Factors (https://openstax.org/l/partdecomprlf) 
Partial Fraction Decomposition With Linear and Quadratic Factors (https://openstax.org/l/partdecomlqu) 

 11.4 SECTION EXERCISES 
Verbal 

1 . Can any quotient of  2 . Can you explain why a  3 . Can you explain how to 
polynomials be decomposed partial fraction verify a partial fraction 
into at least two partial decomposition is unique? decomposition graphically? 
fractions? If so, explain why, (Hint: Think about it as a 
and if not, give an example system of equations.) 
of such a fraction 

4 . You are unsure if you correctly decomposed the  5 . Once you have a system of equations generated by 
partial fraction correctly. Explain how you could the partial fraction decomposition, can you explain 
double-check your answer. another method to solve it? For example if you had 

, we eventually simplify 
to  Explain how 
you could intelligently choose an  -value that will 
eliminate either  or  and solve for  and 

Algebraic 

For the following exercises, find the decomposition of the partial fraction for the nonrepeating linear factors. 

6 .  7 .  8 . 

9 .  10 .  11 . 

12 .  13 .  14 . 

15 .  16 .  17 . 

18 .  19 . 

For the following exercises, find the decomposition of the partial fraction for the repeating linear factors. 

20 .  21 .  22 . 

23 .  24 .  25 . 

26 .  27 .  28 . 

29 .  30 . 



1052     11 • Systems of Equations and Inequalities

For the following exercises, find the decomposition of the partial fraction for the irreducible nonrepeating quadratic 
factor. 

31 .  32 .  33 . 

34 .  35 .  36 . 

37 .  38 .  39 . 

40 .  41 .  42 . 

43 . 

For the following exercises, find the decomposition of the partial fraction for the irreducible repeating quadratic factor. 

44 .  45 .  46 . 

47 .  48 .  49 . 

50 .  51 .  52 . 

53 .  54 . 

Extensions 

For the following exercises, find the partial fraction expansion. 

55 .  56 . 

For the following exercises, perform the operation and then find the partial fraction decomposition. 

57 .  58 .  59 . 

11.5 Matrices and Matrix Operations 
Learning Objectives 
In this section, you will: 

Find the sum and difference of two matrices. 
Find scalar multiples of a matrix. 
Find the product of two matrices. 

Access for free at openstax.org



11.5 • Matrices and Matrix Operations     1053

Figure 1 (credit: “SD Dirk,” Flickr) 
Two club soccer teams, the Wildcats and the Mud Cats, are hoping to obtain new equipment for an upcoming season. 
Table 1 shows the needs of both teams. 

Wildcats Mud Cats 

Goals 6 10 

Balls 30 24 

Jerseys 14 20 

Table 1 

A goal costs $300; a ball costs $10; and a jersey costs $30. How can we find the total cost for the equipment needed for 
each team? In this section, we discover a method in which the data in the soccer equipment table can be displayed and 
used for calculating other information. Then, we will be able to calculate the cost of the equipment. 

Finding the Sum and Difference of Two Matrices 
To solve a problem like the one described for the soccer teams, we can use a matrix, which is a rectangular array of 
numbers. A row in a matrix is a set of numbers that are aligned horizontally. A column in a matrix is a set of numbers 
that are aligned vertically. Each number is an entry, sometimes called an element, of the matrix. Matrices (plural) are 
enclosed in [ ] or ( ), and are usually named with capital letters. For example, three matrices named  and  are 
shown below. 

Describing Matrices 
A matrix is often referred to by its size or dimensions:  indicating  rows and  columns. Matrix entries are defined 
first by row and then by column. For example, to locate the entry in matrix  identified as  we look for the entry in 
row  column  In matrix    shown below, the entry in row 2, column 3 is 



1054     11 • Systems of Equations and Inequalities

A square matrix is a matrix with dimensions  meaning that it has the same number of rows as columns. The 
matrix above is an example of a square matrix. 
A row matrix is a matrix consisting of one row with dimensions 

A column matrix is a matrix consisting of one column with dimensions 

A matrix may be used to represent a system of equations. In these cases, the numbers represent the coefficients of the 
variables in the system. Matrices often make solving systems of equations easier because they are not encumbered with 
variables. We will investigate this idea further in the next section, but first we will look at basic matrix operations. 

Matrices 

A matrix is a rectangular array of numbers that is usually named by a capital letter:  and so on. Each entry in 
a matrix is referred to as  such that  represents the row and  represents the column. Matrices are often referred 
to by their dimensions:  indicating  rows and  columns. 

EXAMPLE 1 

Finding the Dimensions of the Given Matrix and Locating Entries 
Given matrix 

ⓐ What are the dimensions of matrix  ⓑ What are the entries at  and 

Solution 
ⓐ The dimensions are  because there are three rows and three columns. 
ⓑ Entry  is the number at row 3, column 1, which is 3. The entry  is the number at row 2, column 2, which is 4. 
Remember, the row comes first, then the column. 

Adding and Subtracting Matrices 
We use matrices to list data or to represent systems. Because the entries are numbers, we can perform operations on 
matrices. We add or subtract matrices by adding or subtracting corresponding entries. 
In order to do this, the entries must correspond. Therefore, addition and subtraction of matrices is only possible when 
the matrices have the same dimensions. We can add or subtract a  matrix and another  matrix, but we cannot 
add or subtract a  matrix and a  matrix because some entries in one matrix will not have a corresponding 
entry in the other matrix. 

Adding and Subtracting Matrices 

Given matrices  and  of like dimensions, addition and subtraction of  and  will produce matrix  or 
matrix  of the same dimension. 

Matrix addition is commutative. 

Access for free at openstax.org



11.5 • Matrices and Matrix Operations     1055

It is also associative. 

EXAMPLE 2 

Finding the Sum of Matrices 
Find the sum of  and  given 

Solution 
Add corresponding entries. 

EXAMPLE 3 

Adding Matrix A and Matrix B 
Find the sum of  and 

Solution 
Add corresponding entries. Add the entry in row 1, column 1,  of matrix  to the entry in row 1, column 1,  of 
Continue the pattern until all entries have been added. 

EXAMPLE 4 

Finding the Difference of Two Matrices 
Find the difference of  and 

Solution 
We subtract the corresponding entries of each matrix. 



1056     11 • Systems of Equations and Inequalities

EXAMPLE 5 

Finding the Sum and Difference of Two 3 x 3 Matrices 
Given  and 

ⓐ Find the sum.  ⓑ Find the difference. 

Solution 
ⓐ Add the corresponding entries.  ⓑ Subtract the corresponding entries. 

 TRY IT #1 Add matrix  and matrix 

Finding Scalar Multiples of a Matrix 
Besides adding and subtracting whole matrices, there are many situations in which we need to multiply a matrix by a 
constant called a scalar. Recall that a scalar is a real number quantity that has magnitude, but not direction. For example, 
time, temperature, and distance are scalar quantities. The process of scalar multiplication involves multiplying each 
entry in a matrix by a scalar. A scalar multiple is any entry of a matrix that results from scalar multiplication. 
Consider a real-world scenario in which a university needs to add to its inventory of computers, computer tables, and 
chairs in two of the campus labs due to increased enrollment. They estimate that 15% more equipment is needed in both 
labs. The school’s current inventory is displayed in Table 2. 

Access for free at openstax.org



11.5 • Matrices and Matrix Operations     1057

Lab A Lab B 

Computers 15 27 

Computer Tables 16 34 

Chairs 16 34 

Table 2 

Converting the data to a matrix, we have 

To calculate how much computer equipment will be needed, we multiply all entries in matrix  by 0.15. 

We must round up to the next integer, so the amount of new equipment needed is 

Adding the two matrices as shown below, we see the new inventory amounts. 

This means 

Thus, Lab A will have 18 computers, 19 computer tables, and 19 chairs; Lab B will have 32 computers, 40 computer 
tables, and 40 chairs. 

Scalar Multiplication 

Scalar multiplication involves finding the product of a constant by each entry in the matrix. Given 

the scalar multiple  is 

Scalar multiplication is distributive. For the matrices  and  with scalars  and 



1058     11 • Systems of Equations and Inequalities

EXAMPLE 6 

Multiplying the Matrix by a Scalar 
Multiply matrix  by the scalar 3. 

Solution 
Multiply each entry in  by the scalar 3. 

 TRY IT #2 Given matrix  find  where 

EXAMPLE 7 

Finding the Sum of Scalar Multiples 
Find the sum 

Solution 
First, find  then 

Access for free at openstax.org



11.5 • Matrices and Matrix Operations     1059

Now, add 

Finding the Product of Two Matrices 
In addition to multiplying a matrix by a scalar, we can multiply two matrices. Finding the product of two matrices is only 
possible when the inner dimensions are the same, meaning that the number of columns of the first matrix is equal to 
the number of rows of the second matrix. If  is an  matrix and  is an  matrix, then the product matrix  is 
an  matrix. For example, the product  is possible because the number of columns in  is the same as the 
number of rows in  If the inner dimensions do not match, the product is not defined. 

We multiply entries of  with entries of  according to a specific pattern as outlined below. The process of matrix 
multiplication becomes clearer when working a problem with real numbers. 
To obtain the entries in row  of  we multiply the entries in row  of  by column  in  and add. For example, given 
matrices  and  where the dimensions of  are  and the dimensions of  are  the product of  will be a 

 matrix. 

Multiply and add as follows to obtain the first entry of the product matrix 
1. To obtain the entry in row 1, column 1 of  multiply the first row in  by the first column in  and add. 

2. To obtain the entry in row 1, column 2 of  multiply the first row of  by the second column in  and add. 



1060     11 • Systems of Equations and Inequalities

3. To obtain the entry in row 1, column 3 of  multiply the first row of  by the third column in  and add. 

We proceed the same way to obtain the second row of  In other words, row 2 of  times column 1 of  row 2 of 
times column 2 of  row 2 of  times column 3 of  When complete, the product matrix will be 

Properties of Matrix Multiplication 

For the matrices  and  the following properties hold. 

• Matrix multiplication is associative: 

• Matrix multiplication is distributive: 

Note that matrix multiplication is not commutative. 

EXAMPLE 8 

Multiplying Two Matrices 
Multiply matrix  and matrix 

Solution 
First, we check the dimensions of the matrices. Matrix  has dimensions  and matrix  has dimensions  The 
inner dimensions are the same so we can perform the multiplication. The product will have the dimensions 
We perform the operations outlined previously. 

EXAMPLE 9 

Multiplying Two Matrices 
Given  and 

ⓐ  Find  ⓑ  Find 

Access for free at openstax.org



11.5 • Matrices and Matrix Operations     1061

Solution 
ⓐ As the dimensions of  are  and the dimensions of  are  these matrices can be multiplied together 
because the number of columns in  matches the number of rows in  The resulting product will be a  matrix, 
the number of rows in  by the number of columns in 

ⓑ The dimensions of  are  and the dimensions of  are  The inner dimensions match so the product is 
defined and will be a  matrix. 

Analysis 
Notice that the products  and  are not equal. 

This illustrates the fact that matrix multiplication is not commutative. 

 Q&A Is it possible for AB to be defined but not BA? 

Yes, consider a matrix A with dimension  and matrix B with dimension  For the product AB 
the inner dimensions are 4 and the product is defined, but for the product BA the inner dimensions are 
2 and 3 so the product is undefined. 

EXAMPLE 10 

Using Matrices in Real-World Problems 
Let’s return to the problem presented at the opening of this section. We have Table 3, representing the equipment needs 
of two soccer teams. 



1062     11 • Systems of Equations and Inequalities

Wildcats Mud Cats 

Goals 6 10 

Balls 30 24 

Jerseys 14 20 

Table 3 

We are also given the prices of the equipment, as shown in Table 4. 

Goal $300 

Ball $10 

Jersey $30 

Table 4 

We will convert the data to matrices. Thus, the equipment need matrix is written as 

The cost matrix is written as 

We perform matrix multiplication to obtain costs for the equipment. 

The total cost for equipment for the Wildcats is $2,520, and the total cost for equipment for the Mud Cats is $3,840. 

...
HOW TO 

Given a matrix operation, evaluate using a calculator. 

1. Save each matrix as a matrix variable 
2. Enter the operation into the calculator, calling up each matrix variable as needed. 
3. If the operation is defined, the calculator will present the solution matrix; if the operation is undefined, it will 

display an error message. 

Access for free at openstax.org



11.5 • Matrices and Matrix Operations     1063

EXAMPLE 11 

Using a Calculator to Perform Matrix Operations 
Find  given 

Solution 
On the matrix page of the calculator, we enter matrix  above as the matrix variable  matrix  above as the matrix 
variable  and matrix  above as the matrix variable 
On the home screen of the calculator, we type in the problem and call up each matrix variable as needed. 

The calculator gives us the following matrix. 

 MEDIA 

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with matrices and matrix operations. 

Dimensions of a Matrix (https://openstax.org/l/matrixdimen) 
Matrix Addition and Subtraction (https://openstax.org/l/matrixaddsub) 
Matrix Operations (https://openstax.org/l/matrixoper) 
Matrix Multiplication (https://openstax.org/l/matrixmult) 

 11.5 SECTION EXERCISES 
Verbal 

1 . Can we add any two  2 . Can we multiply any column  3 . Can both the products 
matrices together? If so, matrix by any row matrix? and  be defined? If so, 
explain why; if not, explain Explain why or why not. explain how; if not, explain 
why not and give an why. 
example of two matrices 
that cannot be added 
together. 

4 . Can any two matrices of the  5 . Does matrix multiplication 
same size be multiplied? If commute? That is, does 
so, explain why, and if not,  If so, prove why 
explain why not and give an it does. If not, explain why it 
example of two matrices of does not. 
the same size that cannot be 
multiplied together. 

Algebraic 

For the following exercises, use the matrices below and perform the matrix addition or subtraction. Indicate if the 
operation is undefined. 



1064     11 • Systems of Equations and Inequalities

6 .  7 .  8 . 
9 .  10 .  11 . 

For the following exercises, use the matrices below to perform scalar multiplication. 

12 .  13 .  14 . 

15 .  16 .  17 . 

For the following exercises, use the matrices below to perform matrix multiplication. 

18 .  19 .  20 . 
21 .  22 .  23 . 

For the following exercises, use the matrices below to perform the indicated operation if possible. If not possible, explain 
why the operation cannot be performed. 

24 .  25 .  26 . 
27 .  28 .  29 . 

For the following exercises, use the matrices below to perform the indicated operation if possible. If not possible, explain 
why the operation cannot be performed. (Hint:  ) 

30 .  31 .  32 . 

33 .  34 .  35 . 

36 .  37 .  38 . 

39 .  40 . 

For the following exercises, use the matrices below to perform the indicated operation if possible. If not possible, explain 
why the operation cannot be performed. (Hint:  ) 

41 .  42 .  43 . 

44 .  45 .  46 . 

47 .  48 .  49 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



11.6 • Solving Systems with Gaussian Elimination     1065

Technology 

For the following exercises, use the matrices below to perform the indicated operation if possible. If not possible, explain 
why the operation cannot be performed. Use a calculator to verify your solution. 

50 .  51 .  52 . 
53 .  54 . 

Extensions 

For the following exercises, use the matrix below to perform the indicated operation on the given matrix. 

55 .  56 .  57 . 

58 .  59 . Using the above questions, 
find a formula for  Test 
the formula for  and 

 using a calculator. 

11.6 Solving Systems with Gaussian Elimination 
Learning Objectives 
In this section, you will: 

Write the augmented matrix of a system of equations. 
Write the system of equations from an augmented matrix. 
Perform row operations on a matrix. 
Solve a system of linear equations using matrices. 

Figure 1 German mathematician Carl Friedrich Gauss (1777–1855). 
Carl Friedrich Gauss lived during the late 18th century and early 19th century, but he is still considered one of the most 
prolific mathematicians in history. His contributions to the science of mathematics and physics span fields such as 
algebra, number theory, analysis, differential geometry, astronomy, and optics, among others. His discoveries regarding 
matrix theory changed the way mathematicians have worked for the last two centuries. 
We first encountered Gaussian elimination in Systems of Linear Equations: Two Variables. In this section, we will revisit 



1066     11 • Systems of Equations and Inequalities

this technique for solving systems, this time using matrices. 

Writing the Augmented Matrix of a System of Equations 
A matrix can serve as a device for representing and solving a system of equations. To express a system in matrix form, 
we extract the coefficients of the variables and the constants, and these become the entries of the matrix. We use a 
vertical line to separate the coefficient entries from the constants, essentially replacing the equal signs. When a system is 
written in this form, we call it an augmented matrix. 
For example, consider the following  system of equations. 

We can write this system as an augmented matrix: 

We can also write a matrix containing just the coefficients. This is called the coefficient matrix. 

A three-by-three system of equations such as 

has a coefficient matrix 

and is represented by the augmented matrix 

Notice that the matrix is written so that the variables line up in their own columns: x-terms go in the first column, 
y-terms in the second column, and z-terms in the third column. It is very important that each equation is written in 
standard form  so that the variables line up. When there is a missing variable term in an equation, the 
coefficient is 0. 

...
HOW TO 

Given a system of equations, write an augmented matrix. 

1. Write the coefficients of the x-terms as the numbers down the first column. 
2. Write the coefficients of the y-terms as the numbers down the second column. 
3. If there are z-terms, write the coefficients as the numbers down the third column. 
4. Draw a vertical line and write the constants to the right of the line. 

EXAMPLE 1 

Writing the Augmented Matrix for a System of Equations 
Write the augmented matrix for the given system of equations. 

Access for free at openstax.org



11.6 • Solving Systems with Gaussian Elimination     1067

Solution 
The augmented matrix displays the coefficients of the variables, and an additional column for the constants. 

 TRY IT #1 Write the augmented matrix of the given system of equations. 

Writing a System of Equations from an Augmented Matrix 
We can use augmented matrices to help us solve systems of equations because they simplify operations when the 
systems are not encumbered by the variables. However, it is important to understand how to move back and forth 
between formats in order to make finding solutions smoother and more intuitive. Here, we will use the information in an 
augmented matrix to write the system of equations in standard form. 

EXAMPLE 2 

Writing a System of Equations from an Augmented Matrix Form 
Find the system of equations from the augmented matrix. 

Solution 
When the columns represent the variables   and 

 TRY IT #2 Write the system of equations from the augmented matrix. 

Performing Row Operations on a Matrix 
Now that we can write systems of equations in augmented matrix form, we will examine the various row operations 
that can be performed on a matrix, such as addition, multiplication by a constant, and interchanging rows. 
Performing row operations on a matrix is the method we use for solving a system of equations. In order to solve the 
system of equations, we want to convert the matrix to row-echelon form, in which there are ones down the main 
diagonal from the upper left corner to the lower right corner, and zeros in every position below the main diagonal as 
shown. 



1068     11 • Systems of Equations and Inequalities

We use row operations corresponding to equation operations to obtain a new matrix that is row-equivalent in a simpler 
form. Here are the guidelines to obtaining row-echelon form. 
1. In any nonzero row, the first nonzero number is a 1. It is called a leading 1. 
2. Any all-zero rows are placed at the bottom on the matrix. 
3. Any leading 1 is below and to the right of a previous leading 1. 
4. Any column containing a leading 1 has zeros in all other positions in the column. 

To solve a system of equations we can perform the following row operations to convert the coefficient matrix to row-
echelon form and do back-substitution to find the solution. 
1. Interchange rows. (Notation:  ) 
2. Multiply a row by a constant. (Notation:  ) 
3. Add the product of a row multiplied by a constant to another row. (Notation: 

Each of the row operations corresponds to the operations we have already learned to solve systems of equations in 
three variables. With these operations, there are some key moves that will quickly achieve the goal of writing a matrix in 
row-echelon form. To obtain a matrix in row-echelon form for finding solutions, we use Gaussian elimination, a method 
that uses row operations to obtain a 1 as the first entry so that row 1 can be used to convert the remaining rows. 

Gaussian Elimination 

The Gaussian elimination method refers to a strategy used to obtain the row-echelon form of a matrix. The goal is to 
write matrix  with the number 1 as the entry down the main diagonal and have all zeros below. 

The first step of the Gaussian strategy includes obtaining a 1 as the first entry, so that row 1 may be used to alter the 
rows below. 

...
HOW TO 

Given an augmented matrix, perform row operations to achieve row-echelon form. 

1. The first equation should have a leading coefficient of 1. Interchange rows or multiply by a constant, if necessary. 
2. Use row operations to obtain zeros down the first column below the first entry of 1. 
3. Use row operations to obtain a 1 in row 2, column 2. 
4. Use row operations to obtain zeros down column 2, below the entry of 1. 
5. Use row operations to obtain a 1 in row 3, column 3. 
6. Continue this process for all rows until there is a 1 in every entry down the main diagonal and there are only 

zeros below. 
7. If any rows contain all zeros, place them at the bottom. 

EXAMPLE 3 

Solving a  System by Gaussian Elimination 
Solve the given system by Gaussian elimination. 

Access for free at openstax.org



11.6 • Solving Systems with Gaussian Elimination     1069

Solution 
First, we write this as an augmented matrix. 

We want a 1 in row 1, column 1. This can be accomplished by interchanging row 1 and row 2. 

We now have a 1 as the first entry in row 1, column 1. Now let’s obtain a 0 in row 2, column 1. This can be accomplished 
by multiplying row 1 by  and then adding the result to row 2. 

We only have one more step, to multiply row 2 by 

Use back-substitution. The second row of the matrix represents  Back-substitute  into the first equation. 

The solution is the point 

 TRY IT #3 Solve the given system by Gaussian elimination. 

EXAMPLE 4 

Using Gaussian Elimination to Solve a System of Equations 
Use Gaussian elimination to solve the given  system of equations. 

Solution 
Write the system as an augmented matrix. 

Obtain a 1 in row 1, column 1. This can be accomplished by multiplying the first row by 

Next, we want a 0 in row 2, column 1. Multiply row 1 by  and add row 1 to row 2. 



1070     11 • Systems of Equations and Inequalities

The second row represents the equation  Therefore, the system is inconsistent and has no solution. 

EXAMPLE 5 

Solving a Dependent System 
Solve the system of equations. 

Solution 
Perform row operations on the augmented matrix to try and achieve row-echelon form. 

The matrix ends up with all zeros in the last row:  Thus, there are an infinite number of solutions and the system 
is classified as dependent. To find the generic solution, return to one of the original equations and solve for 

So the solution to this system is 

EXAMPLE 6 

Performing Row Operations on a 3×3 Augmented Matrix to Obtain Row-Echelon Form 
Perform row operations on the given matrix to obtain row-echelon form. 

Solution 
The first row already has a 1 in row 1, column 1. The next step is to multiply row 1 by  and add it to row 2. Then replace 
row 2 with the result. 

Next, obtain a zero in row 3, column 1. 

Access for free at openstax.org



11.6 • Solving Systems with Gaussian Elimination     1071

Next, obtain a zero in row 3, column 2. 

The last step is to obtain a 1 in row 3, column 3. 

 TRY IT #4 Write the system of equations in row-echelon form. 

Solving a System of Linear Equations Using Matrices 
We have seen how to write a system of equations with an augmented matrix, and then how to use row operations and 
back-substitution to obtain row-echelon form. Now, we will take row-echelon form a step farther to solve a 3 by 3 system 
of linear equations. The general idea is to eliminate all but one variable using row operations and then back-substitute to 
solve for the other variables. 

EXAMPLE 7 

Solving a System of Linear Equations Using Matrices 
Solve the system of linear equations using matrices. 

Solution 
First, we write the augmented matrix. 

Next, we perform row operations to obtain row-echelon form. 

The easiest way to obtain a 1 in row 2, column 2 is to interchange  and 

Then 



1072     11 • Systems of Equations and Inequalities

The last matrix represents the equivalent system. 

Using back-substitution, we obtain the solution as 

EXAMPLE 8 

Solving a Dependent System of Linear Equations Using Matrices 
Solve the following system of linear equations using matrices. 

Solution 
Write the augmented matrix. 

First, multiply row 1 by  to get a 1 in row 1, column 1. Then, perform row operations to obtain row-echelon form. 

The last matrix represents the following system. 

We see by the identity  that this is a dependent system with an infinite number of solutions. We then find the 
generic solution. By solving the second equation for  and substituting it into the first equation we can solve for  in 
terms of 

Access for free at openstax.org



11.6 • Solving Systems with Gaussian Elimination     1073

Now we substitute the expression for  into the second equation to solve for  in terms of 

The generic solution is 

 TRY IT #5 Solve the system using matrices. 

 Q&A Can any system of linear equations be solved by Gaussian elimination? 

Yes, a system of linear equations of any size can be solved by Gaussian elimination. 

...
HOW TO 

Given a system of equations, solve with matrices using a calculator. 

1. Save the augmented matrix as a matrix variable 
2. Use the ref( function in the calculator, calling up each matrix variable as needed. 

EXAMPLE 9 

Solving Systems of Equations with Matrices Using a Calculator 
Solve the system of equations. 

Solution 
Write the augmented matrix for the system of equations. 

On the matrix page of the calculator, enter the augmented matrix above as the matrix variable 



1074     11 • Systems of Equations and Inequalities

Use the ref( function in the calculator, calling up the matrix variable 

Evaluate. 

Using back-substitution, the solution is 

EXAMPLE 10 

Applying 2 × 2 Matrices to Finance 
Carolyn invests a total of $12,000 in two municipal bonds, one paying 10.5% interest and the other paying 12% interest. 
The annual interest earned on the two investments last year was $1,335. How much was invested at each rate? 

Solution 
We have a system of two equations in two variables. Let  the amount invested at 10.5% interest, and  the amount 
invested at 12% interest. 

As a matrix, we have 

Multiply row 1 by  and add the result to row 2. 

Then, 

So 
Thus, $5,000 was invested at 12% interest and $7,000 at 10.5% interest. 

EXAMPLE 11 

Applying 3 × 3 Matrices to Finance 
Ava invests a total of $10,000 in three accounts, one paying 5% interest, another paying 8% interest, and the third paying 
9% interest. The annual interest earned on the three investments last year was $770. The amount invested at 9% was 
twice the amount invested at 5%. How much was invested at each rate? 

Solution 
We have a system of three equations in three variables. Let  be the amount invested at 5% interest, let  be the amount 
invested at 8% interest, and let  be the amount invested at 9% interest. Thus, 

Access for free at openstax.org



11.6 • Solving Systems with Gaussian Elimination     1075

As a matrix, we have 

Now, we perform Gaussian elimination to achieve row-echelon form. 

The third row tells us  thus 

The second row tells us  Substituting  we get 

The first row tells us  Substituting  and  we get 

The answer is $3,000 invested at 5% interest, $1,000 invested at 8%, and $6,000 invested at 9% interest. 

 TRY IT #6 A small shoe company took out a loan of $1,500,000 to expand their inventory. Part of the money 
was borrowed at 7%, part was borrowed at 8%, and part was borrowed at 10%. The amount 
borrowed at 10% was four times the amount borrowed at 7%, and the annual interest on all three 
loans was $130,500. Use matrices to find the amount borrowed at each rate. 

 MEDIA 

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with solving systems of linear equations using 
Gaussian elimination. 

Solve a System of Two Equations Using an Augmented Matrix (https://openstax.org/l/system2augmat) 
Solve a System of Three Equations Using an Augmented Matrix (https://openstax.org/l/system3augmat) 
Augmented Matrices on the Calculator (https://openstax.org/l/augmatcalc) 



1076     11 • Systems of Equations and Inequalities

 11.6 SECTION EXERCISES 
Verbal 

1 . Can any system of linear  2 . Can any matrix be written as  3 . Is there only one correct 
equations be written as an a system of linear method of using row 
augmented matrix? Explain equations? Explain why or operations on a matrix? Try 
why or why not. Explain how why not. Explain how to to explain two different row 
to write that augmented write that system of operations possible to solve 
matrix. equations. the augmented matrix 

4 . Can a matrix whose entry is  5 . Can a matrix that has 0 
0 on the diagonal be solved? entries for an entire row 
Explain why or why not. have one solution? Explain 
What would you do to why or why not. 
remedy the situation? 

Algebraic 

For the following exercises, write the augmented matrix for the linear system. 

6 .  7 .  8 . 

9 .  10 . 

For the following exercises, write the linear system from the augmented matrix. 

11 .  12 .  13 . 

14 .  15 . 

For the following exercises, solve the system by Gaussian elimination. 

16 .  17 .  18 . 

19 .  20 .  21 . 

22 .  23 .  24 . 

25 .  26 .  27 . 

28 .  29 .  30 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



11.6 • Solving Systems with Gaussian Elimination     1077

31 .  32 .  33 . 

34 .  35 .  36 . 

37 .  38 .  39 . 

40 .  41 .  42 . 

43 .  44 .  45 . 

46 . 

Extensions 

For the following exercises, use Gaussian elimination to solve the system. 

47 .  48 .  49 . 

50 .  51 . 

Real-World Applications 

For the following exercises, set up the augmented matrix that describes the situation, and solve for the desired solution. 
52 . Every day, Angeni's  53 . At Bakari's competing  54 . You invested $10,000 into 

cupcake store sells 5,000 cupcake store, $4,520 two accounts: one that has 
cupcakes in chocolate and worth of cupcakes are sold simple 3% interest, the 
vanilla flavors. If the daily. The chocolate other with 2.5% interest. If 
chocolate flavor is 3 times cupcakes cost $2.25 and your total interest payment 
as popular as the vanilla the red velvet cupcakes after one year was 
flavor, how many of each cost $1.75. If the total $283.50, how much was in 
cupcake does the store sell number of cupcakes sold each account after the year 
per day? per day is 2,200, how many passed? 

of each flavor are sold each 
day? 



1078     11 • Systems of Equations and Inequalities

55 . You invested $2,300 into  56 . Bikes’R’Us manufactures  57 . A major appliance store 
account 1, and $2,700 into bikes, which sell for $250. has agreed to order 
account 2. If the total It costs the manufacturer vacuums from a startup 
amount of interest after $180 per bike, plus a founded by college 
one year is $254, and startup fee of $3,500. After engineering students. The 
account 2 has 1.5 times the how many bikes sold will store would be able to 
interest rate of account 1, the manufacturer break purchase the vacuums for 
what are the interest rates? even? $86 each, with a delivery 
Assume simple interest fee of $9,200, regardless of 
rates. how many vacuums are 

sold. If the store needs to 
start seeing a profit after 
230 units are sold, how 
much should they charge 
for the vacuums? 

58 . The three most popular ice  59 . At an ice cream shop, three  60 . A bag of mixed nuts 
cream flavors are flavors are increasing in contains cashews, 
chocolate, strawberry, and demand. Last year, banana, pistachios, and almonds. 
vanilla, comprising 83% of pumpkin, and rocky road There are 1,000 total nuts 
the flavors sold at an ice ice cream made up 12% of in the bag, and there are 
cream shop. If vanilla sells total ice cream sales. This 100 less almonds than 
1% more than twice year, the same three ice pistachios. The cashews 
strawberry, and chocolate creams made up 16.9% of weigh 3 g, pistachios weigh 
sells 11% more than ice cream sales. The rocky 4 g, and almonds weigh 5 
vanilla, how much of the road sales doubled, the g. If the bag weighs 3.7 kg, 
total ice cream banana sales increased by find out how many of each 
consumption are the 50%, and the pumpkin type of nut is in the bag. 
vanilla, chocolate, and sales increased by 20%. If 
strawberry flavors? the rocky road ice cream 

had one less percent of 
sales than the banana ice 
cream, find out the 
percentage of ice cream 
sales each individual ice 
cream made last year. 

61 . A bag of mixed nuts 
contains cashews, 
pistachios, and almonds. 
Originally there were 900 
nuts in the bag. 30% of the 
almonds, 20% of the 
cashews, and 10% of the 
pistachios were eaten, and 
now there are 770 nuts left 
in the bag. Originally, there 
were 100 more cashews 
than almonds. Figure out 
how many of each type of 
nut was in the bag to begin 
with. 

11.7 Solving Systems with Inverses 
Learning Objectives 
In this section, you will: 

Find the inverse of a matrix. 
Solve a system of linear equations using an inverse matrix. 

Access for free at openstax.org



11.7 • Solving Systems with Inverses     1079

Soriya plans to invest $10,500 into two different bonds to spread out her risk. The first bond has an annual return of 
10%, and the second bond has an annual return of 6%. In order to receive an 8.5% return from the two bonds, how much 
should Soriya invest in each bond? What is the best method to solve this problem? 
There are several ways we can solve this problem. As we have seen in previous sections, systems of equations and 
matrices are useful in solving real-world problems involving finance. After studying this section, we will have the tools to 
solve the bond problem using the inverse of a matrix. 

Finding the Inverse of a Matrix 
We know that the multiplicative inverse of a real number  is  and  For example, 
and  The multiplicative inverse of a matrix is similar in concept, except that the product of matrix  and its 
inverse  equals the identity matrix. The identity matrix is a square matrix containing ones down the main diagonal 
and zeros everywhere else. We identify identity matrices by  where  represents the dimension of the matrix. Observe 
the following equations. 

The identity matrix acts as a 1 in matrix algebra. For example, 
A matrix that has a multiplicative inverse has the properties 

A matrix that has a multiplicative inverse is called an invertible matrix. Only a square matrix may have a multiplicative 
inverse, as the reversibility,  is a requirement. Not all square matrices have an inverse, but if  is 
invertible, then  is unique. We will look at two methods for finding the inverse of a  matrix and a third method 
that can be used on both  and  matrices. 

The Identity Matrix and Multiplicative Inverse 

The identity matrix,  is a square matrix containing ones down the main diagonal and zeros everywhere else. 

If  is an  matrix and  is an  matrix such that  then  the multiplicative 
inverse of a matrix 

EXAMPLE 1 

Showing That the Identity Matrix Acts as a 1 
Given matrix A, show that 

Solution 
Use matrix multiplication to show that the product of  and the identity is equal to the product of the identity and A. 



1080     11 • Systems of Equations and Inequalities

...
HOW TO 

Given two matrices, show that one is the multiplicative inverse of the other. 

1. Given matrix  of order  and matrix  of order  multiply 
2. If  then find the product  If  then  and 

EXAMPLE 2 

Showing That Matrix A Is the Multiplicative Inverse of Matrix B 
Show that the given matrices are multiplicative inverses of each other. 

Solution 
Multiply  and  If both products equal the identity, then the two matrices are inverses of each other. 

 and  are inverses of each other. 

 TRY IT #1 Show that the following two matrices are inverses of each other. 

Finding the Multiplicative Inverse Using Matrix Multiplication 
We can now determine whether two matrices are inverses, but how would we find the inverse of a given matrix? Since 
we know that the product of a matrix and its inverse is the identity matrix, we can find the inverse of a matrix by setting 
up an equation using matrix multiplication. 

Access for free at openstax.org



11.7 • Solving Systems with Inverses     1081

EXAMPLE 3 

Finding the Multiplicative Inverse Using Matrix Multiplication 
Use matrix multiplication to find the inverse of the given matrix. 

Solution 
For this method, we multiply  by a matrix containing unknown constants and set it equal to the identity. 

Find the product of the two matrices on the left side of the equal sign. 

Next, set up a system of equations with the entry in row 1, column 1 of the new matrix equal to the first entry of the 
identity, 1. Set the entry in row 2, column 1 of the new matrix equal to the corresponding entry of the identity, which is 0. 

Using row operations, multiply and add as follows:  Add the equations, and solve for 

Back-substitute to solve for 

Write another system of equations setting the entry in row 1, column 2 of the new matrix equal to the corresponding 
entry of the identity, 0. Set the entry in row 2, column 2 equal to the corresponding entry of the identity. 

Using row operations, multiply and add as follows:  Add the two equations and solve for 

Once more, back-substitute and solve for 

Finding the Multiplicative Inverse by Augmenting with the Identity 
Another way to find the multiplicative inverse is by augmenting with the identity. When matrix  is transformed into 
the augmented matrix  transforms into 
For example, given 



1082     11 • Systems of Equations and Inequalities

augment  with the identity 

Perform row operations with the goal of turning  into the identity. 
1. Switch row 1 and row 2. 

2. Multiply row 2 by  and add to row 1. 

3. Multiply row 1 by  and add to row 2. 

4. Add row 2 to row 1. 

5. Multiply row 2 by 

The matrix we have found is 

Finding the Multiplicative Inverse of 2×2 Matrices Using a Formula 
When we need to find the multiplicative inverse of a  matrix, we can use a special formula instead of using matrix 
multiplication or augmenting with the identity. 
If  is a  matrix, such as 

the multiplicative inverse of  is given by the formula 

where  If  then  has no inverse. 

EXAMPLE 4 

Using the Formula to Find the Multiplicative Inverse of Matrix A 
Use the formula to find the multiplicative inverse of 

Solution 
Using the formula, we have 

Access for free at openstax.org



11.7 • Solving Systems with Inverses     1083

Analysis 
We can check that our formula works by using one of the other methods to calculate the inverse. Let’s augment  with 
the identity. 

Perform row operations with the goal of turning  into the identity. 
1. Multiply row 1 by  and add to row 2. 

2. Multiply row 2 by 2 and add to row 1. 

So, we have verified our original solution. 

 TRY IT #2 Use the formula to find the inverse of matrix  Verify your answer by augmenting with the 
identity matrix. 

EXAMPLE 5 

Finding the Inverse of the Matrix, If It Exists 
Find the inverse, if it exists, of the given matrix. 

Solution 

We will use the method of augmenting with the identity. 

1. Switch row 1 and row 2. 

2. Multiply row 1 by −3 and add it to row 2. 

3. There is nothing further we can do. The zeros in row 2 indicate that this matrix has no inverse. 



1084     11 • Systems of Equations and Inequalities

Finding the Multiplicative Inverse of 3×3 Matrices 
Unfortunately, we do not have a formula similar to the one for a  matrix to find the inverse of a  matrix. 
Instead, we will augment the original matrix with the identity matrix and use row operations to obtain the inverse. 
Given a  matrix 

augment  with the identity matrix 

To begin, we write the augmented matrix with the identity on the right and  on the left. Performing elementary row 
operations so that the identity matrix appears on the left, we will obtain the inverse matrix on the right. We will find the 
inverse of this matrix in the next example. 

...
HOW TO 

Given a  matrix, find the inverse 

1. Write the original matrix augmented with the identity matrix on the right. 
2. Use elementary row operations so that the identity appears on the left. 
3. What is obtained on the right is the inverse of the original matrix. 
4. Use matrix multiplication to show that  and 

EXAMPLE 6 

Finding the Inverse of a 3 × 3 Matrix 
Given the  matrix  find the inverse. 

Solution 
Augment  with the identity matrix, and then begin row operations until the identity matrix replaces  The matrix on 
the right will be the inverse of 

Access for free at openstax.org



11.7 • Solving Systems with Inverses     1085

Thus, 

Analysis 

To prove that  let’s multiply the two matrices together to see if the product equals the identity, if  and 

 TRY IT #3 Find the inverse of the  matrix. 

Solving a System of Linear Equations Using the Inverse of a Matrix 
Solving a system of linear equations using the inverse of a matrix requires the definition of two new matrices:  is the 
matrix representing the variables of the system, and  is the matrix representing the constants. Using matrix 
multiplication, we may define a system of equations with the same number of equations as variables as 



1086     11 • Systems of Equations and Inequalities

To solve a system of linear equations using an inverse matrix, let  be the coefficient matrix, let  be the variable 
matrix, and let  be the constant matrix. Thus, we want to solve a system  For example, look at the following 
system of equations. 

From this system, the coefficient matrix is 

The variable matrix is 

And the constant matrix is 

Then  looks like 

Recall the discussion earlier in this section regarding multiplying a real number by its inverse,  To 
solve a single linear equation  for  we would simply multiply both sides of the equation by the multiplicative 
inverse (reciprocal) of  Thus, 

The only difference between a solving a linear equation and a system of equations written in matrix form is that finding 
the inverse of a matrix is more complicated, and matrix multiplication is a longer process. However, the goal is the 
same—to isolate the variable. 
We will investigate this idea in detail, but it is helpful to begin with a  system and then move on to a  system. 

Solving a System of Equations Using the Inverse of a Matrix 

Given a system of equations, write the coefficient matrix  the variable matrix  and the constant matrix  Then 

Multiply both sides by the inverse of  to obtain the solution. 

 Q&A If the coefficient matrix does not have an inverse, does that mean the system has no solution? 

No, if the coefficient matrix is not invertible, the system could be inconsistent and have no solution, or 
be dependent and have infinitely many solutions. 

Access for free at openstax.org



11.7 • Solving Systems with Inverses     1087

EXAMPLE 7 

Solving a 2 × 2 System Using the Inverse of a Matrix 
Solve the given system of equations using the inverse of a matrix. 

Solution 
Write the system in terms of a coefficient matrix, a variable matrix, and a constant matrix. 

Then 

First, we need to calculate  Using the formula to calculate the inverse of a 2 by 2 matrix, we have: 

So, 

​ ​
Now we are ready to solve. Multiply both sides of the equation by 

The solution is 

 Q&A Can we solve for  by finding the product 

No, recall that matrix multiplication is not commutative, so  Consider our steps for 
solving the matrix equation. 

Notice in the first step we multiplied both sides of the equation by  but the  was to the left of 
 on the left side and to the left of  on the right side. Because matrix multiplication is not 

commutative, order matters. 



1088     11 • Systems of Equations and Inequalities

EXAMPLE 8 

Solving a 3 × 3 System Using the Inverse of a Matrix 
Solve the following system using the inverse of a matrix. 

Solution 
Write the equation 

First, we will find the inverse of  by augmenting with the identity. 

Multiply row 1 by 

Multiply row 1 by 4 and add to row 2. 

Add row 1 to row 3. 

Multiply row 2 by −3 and add to row 1. 

Multiply row 3 by 5. 

Multiply row 3 by  and add to row 1. 

Access for free at openstax.org



11.7 • Solving Systems with Inverses     1089

Multiply row 3 by  and add to row 2. 

So, 

Multiply both sides of the equation by  We want 

Thus, 

The solution is 

 TRY IT #4 Solve the system using the inverse of the coefficient matrix. 

...
HOW TO 

Given a system of equations, solve with matrix inverses using a calculator. 

1. Save the coefficient matrix and the constant matrix as matrix variables  and 
2. Enter the multiplication into the calculator, calling up each matrix variable as needed. 
3. If the coefficient matrix is invertible, the calculator will present the solution matrix; if the coefficient matrix is not 

invertible, the calculator will present an error message. 

EXAMPLE 9 

Using a Calculator to Solve a System of Equations with Matrix Inverses 
Solve the system of equations with matrix inverses using a calculator 

Solution 
On the matrix page of the calculator, enter the coefficient matrix as the matrix variable  and enter the constant 
matrix as the matrix variable 



1090     11 • Systems of Equations and Inequalities

 

On the home screen of the calculator, type in the multiplication to solve for  calling up each matrix variable as needed. 

Evaluate the expression. 

 MEDIA 

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with solving systems with inverses. 

The Identity Matrix (https://openstax.org/l/identmatrix) 
Determining Inverse Matrices (https://openstax.org/l/inversematrix) 
Using a Matrix Equation to Solve a System of Equations (https://openstax.org/l/matrixsystem) 

 11.7 SECTION EXERCISES 
Verbal 

1 . In a previous section, we  2 . Does every  matrix  3 . Can you explain whether a 
showed that matrix have an inverse? Explain  matrix with an entire 
multiplication is not why or why not. Explain row of zeros can have an 
commutative, that is, what condition is necessary inverse? 

 in most cases. for an inverse to exist. 
Can you explain why matrix 
multiplication is 
commutative for matrix 
inverses, that is, 

4 . Can a matrix with an entire  5 . Can a matrix with zeros on 
column of zeros have an the diagonal have an 
inverse? Explain why or why inverse? If so, find an 
not. example. If not, prove why 

not. For simplicity, assume a 
 matrix. 

Algebraic 

In the following exercises, show that matrix  is the inverse of matrix 

6 .  7 . 

8 .  9 . 

10 .  11 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



11.7 • Solving Systems with Inverses     1091

12 . 

For the following exercises, find the multiplicative inverse of each matrix, if it exists. 

13 .  14 .  15 . 

16 .  17 .  18 . 

19 .  20 .  21 . 

22 .  23 .  24 . 

25 .  26 . 

For the following exercises, solve the system using the inverse of a  matrix. 

27 .  28 .  29 . 

30 .  31 .  32 . 

33 .  34 . 

For the following exercises, solve a system using the inverse of a  matrix. 

35 .  36 .  37 . 

38 .  39 .  40 . 

41 .  42 . 

Technology 

For the following exercises, use a calculator to solve the system of equations with matrix inverses. 

43 .  44 .  45 . 



1092     11 • Systems of Equations and Inequalities

46 . 

Extensions 

For the following exercises, find the inverse of the given matrix. 

47 .  48 .  49 . 

50 .  51 . 

Real-World Applications 

For the following exercises, write a system of equations that represents the situation. Then, solve the system using the 
inverse of a matrix. 
52 . 2,400 tickets were sold for  53 . In the previous exercise, if  54 . A food drive collected two 

a basketball game. If the you were told there were different types of canned 
prices for floor 1 and floor 400 more tickets sold for goods, green beans and 
2 were different, and the floor 2 than floor 1, how kidney beans. The total 
total amount of money much was the price of each number of collected cans 
brought in is $64,000, how ticket? was 350 and the total 
much was the price of each weight of all donated food 
ticket? was 348 lb, 12 oz. If the 

green bean cans weigh 2 
oz less than the kidney 
bean cans, how many of 
each can was donated? 

55 . Students were asked to  56 . The nursing club held a  57 . A clothing store needs to 
bring their favorite fruit to bake sale to raise money order new inventory. It has 
class. 95% of the fruits and sold brownies and three different types of 
consisted of banana, apple, chocolate chip cookies. hats for sale: straw hats, 
and oranges. If oranges They priced the brownies beanies, and cowboy hats. 
were twice as popular as at $1 and the chocolate The straw hat is priced at 
bananas, and apples were chip cookies at $0.75. They $13.99, the beanie at $7.99, 
5% less popular than raised $700 and sold 850 and the cowboy hat at 
bananas, what are the items. How many brownies $14.49. If 100 hats were 
percentages of each and how many cookies sold this past quarter, 
individual fruit? were sold? $1,119 was taken in by 

sales, and the amount of 
beanies sold was 10 more 
than cowboy hats, how 
many of each should the 
clothing store order to 
replace those already sold? 

Access for free at openstax.org



11.8 • Solving Systems with Cramer's Rule     1093

58 . Anna, Percy, and Morgan  59 . Three roommates shared a  60 . A farmer constructed a 
weigh a combined 370 lb. package of 12 ice cream chicken coop out of 
If Morgan weighs 20 lb bars, but no one chicken wire, wood, and 
more than Percy, and Anna remembers who ate how plywood. The chicken wire 
weighs 1.5 times as much many. If Micah ate twice as cost $2 per square foot, 
as Percy, how much does many ice cream bars as the wood $10 per square 
each person weigh? Joe, and Albert ate three foot, and the plywood $5 

less than Micah, how many per square foot. The 
ice cream bars did each farmer spent a total of $51, 
roommate eat? and the total amount of 

materials used was 
He used  more chicken 
wire than plywood. How 
much of each material in 
did the farmer use? 

61 . Jay has lemon, orange, and 
pomegranate trees in his 
backyard. An orange 
weighs 8 oz, a lemon 5 oz, 
and a pomegranate 11 oz. 
Jay picked 142 pieces of 
fruit weighing a total of 70 
lb, 10 oz. He picked 15.5 
times more oranges than 
pomegranates. How many 
of each fruit did Jay pick? 

11.8 Solving Systems with Cramer's Rule 
Learning Objectives 
In this section, you will: 

Evaluate  2 × 2  determinants. 
Use Cramer’s Rule to solve a system of equations in two variables. 
Evaluate  3 × 3  determinants. 
Use Cramer’s Rule to solve a system of three equations in three variables. 
Know the properties of determinants. 

We have learned how to solve systems of equations in two variables and three variables, and by multiple methods: 
substitution, addition, Gaussian elimination, using the inverse of a matrix, and graphing. Some of these methods are 
easier to apply than others and are more appropriate in certain situations. In this section, we will study two more 
strategies for solving systems of equations. 

Evaluating the Determinant of a 2×2 Matrix 
A determinant is a real number that can be very useful in mathematics because it has multiple applications, such as 
calculating area, volume, and other quantities. Here, we will use determinants to reveal whether a matrix is invertible by 
using the entries of a square matrix to determine whether there is a solution to the system of equations. Perhaps one of 
the more interesting applications, however, is their use in cryptography. Secure signals or messages are sometimes sent 
encoded in a matrix. The data can only be decrypted with an invertible matrix and the determinant. For our purposes, 
we focus on the determinant as an indication of the invertibility of the matrix. Calculating the determinant of a matrix 
involves following the specific patterns that are outlined in this section. 

Find the Determinant of a 2 × 2 Matrix 

The determinant of a  matrix, given 



1094     11 • Systems of Equations and Inequalities

is defined as 

Notice the change in notation. There are several ways to indicate the determinant, including  and replacing the 
brackets in a matrix with straight lines, 

EXAMPLE 1 

Finding the Determinant of a 2 × 2 Matrix 
Find the determinant of the given matrix. 

Solution 

Using Cramer’s Rule to Solve a System of Two Equations in Two Variables 
We will now introduce a final method for solving systems of equations that uses determinants. Known as Cramer’s Rule, 
this technique dates back to the middle of the 18th century and is named for its innovator, the Swiss mathematician 
Gabriel Cramer (1704-1752), who introduced it in 1750 in Introduction à l'Analyse des lignes Courbes algébriques. 
Cramer’s Rule is a viable and efficient method for finding solutions to systems with an arbitrary number of unknowns, 
provided that we have the same number of equations as unknowns. 
Cramer’s Rule will give us the unique solution to a system of equations, if it exists. However, if the system has no solution 
or an infinite number of solutions, this will be indicated by a determinant of zero. To find out if the system is inconsistent 
or dependent, another method, such as elimination, will have to be used. 
To understand Cramer’s Rule, let’s look closely at how we solve systems of linear equations using basic row operations. 
Consider a system of two equations in two variables. 

We eliminate one variable using row operations and solve for the other. Say that we wish to solve for  If equation (2) is 
multiplied by the opposite of the coefficient of  in equation (1), equation (1) is multiplied by the coefficient of  in 
equation (2), and we add the two equations, the variable  will be eliminated. 

Now, solve for 

Similarly, to solve for  we will eliminate 

Access for free at openstax.org



11.8 • Solving Systems with Cramer's Rule     1095

Solving for  gives 

Notice that the denominator for both  and  is the determinant of the coefficient matrix. 
We can use these formulas to solve for  and  but Cramer’s Rule also introduces new notation: 

•  determinant of the coefficient matrix 
•  determinant of the numerator in the solution of 

•  determinant of the numerator in the solution of 

The key to Cramer’s Rule is replacing the variable column of interest with the constant column and calculating the 
determinants. We can then express  and  as a quotient of two determinants. 

Cramer’s Rule for 2×2 Systems 

Cramer’s Rule is a method that uses determinants to solve systems of equations that have the same number of 
equations as variables. 

Consider a system of two linear equations in two variables. 

The solution using Cramer’s Rule is given as 

​ ​

If we are solving for  the  column is replaced with the constant column. If we are solving for  the  column is 
replaced with the constant column. 

EXAMPLE 2 

Using Cramer’s Rule to Solve a 2 × 2 System 
Solve the following  system using Cramer’s Rule. 

Solution 
Solve for 



1096     11 • Systems of Equations and Inequalities

Solve for 

The solution is 

 TRY IT #1 Use Cramer’s Rule to solve the 2 × 2 system of equations. 

Evaluating the Determinant of a 3 × 3 Matrix 
Finding the determinant of a 2×2 matrix is straightforward, but finding the determinant of a 3×3 matrix is more 
complicated. One method is to augment the 3×3 matrix with a repetition of the first two columns, giving a 3×5 matrix. 
Then we calculate the sum of the products of entries down each of the three diagonals (upper left to lower right), and 
subtract the products of entries up each of the three diagonals (lower left to upper right). This is more easily understood 
with a visual and an example. 
Find the determinant of the 3×3 matrix. 

1. Augment  with the first two columns. 

2. From upper left to lower right: Multiply the entries down the first diagonal. Add the result to the product of entries 
down the second diagonal. Add this result to the product of the entries down the third diagonal. 

3. From lower left to upper right: Subtract the product of entries up the first diagonal. From this result subtract the 
product of entries up the second diagonal. From this result, subtract the product of entries up the third diagonal. 

The algebra is as follows: 

EXAMPLE 3 

Finding the Determinant of a 3 × 3 Matrix 
Find the determinant of the 3 × 3 matrix given 

Access for free at openstax.org



11.8 • Solving Systems with Cramer's Rule     1097

Solution 
Augment the matrix with the first two columns and then follow the formula. Thus, 

 TRY IT #2 Find the determinant of the 3 × 3 matrix. 

 Q&A Can we use the same method to find the determinant of a larger matrix? 

No, this method only works for  and  matrices. For larger matrices it is best to use a graphing 
utility or computer software. 

Using Cramer’s Rule to Solve a System of Three Equations in Three Variables 
Now that we can find the determinant of a 3 × 3 matrix, we can apply Cramer’s Rule to solve a system of three equations 
in three variables. Cramer’s Rule is straightforward, following a pattern consistent with Cramer’s Rule for 2 × 2 matrices. 
As the order of the matrix increases to 3 × 3, however, there are many more calculations required. 
When we calculate the determinant to be zero, Cramer’s Rule gives no indication as to whether the system has no 
solution or an infinite number of solutions. To find out, we have to perform elimination on the system. 
Consider a 3 × 3 system of equations. 

where 

If we are writing the determinant  we replace the  column with the constant column. If we are writing the 
determinant  we replace the  column with the constant column. If we are writing the determinant  we replace 
the  column with the constant column. Always check the answer. 

EXAMPLE 4 

Solving a 3 × 3 System Using Cramer’s Rule 
Find the solution to the given 3 × 3 system using Cramer’s Rule. 



1098     11 • Systems of Equations and Inequalities

Solution 
Use Cramer’s Rule. 

Then, 

The solution is 

 TRY IT #3 Use Cramer’s Rule to solve the 3 × 3 matrix. 

EXAMPLE 5 

Using Cramer’s Rule to Solve an Inconsistent System 
Solve the system of equations using Cramer’s Rule. 

 
 

Solution 
We begin by finding the determinants 

We know that a determinant of zero means that either the system has no solution or it has an infinite number of 
solutions. To see which one, we use the process of elimination. Our goal is to eliminate one of the variables. 
1. Multiply equation (1) by 
2. Add the result to equation 

We obtain the equation  which is false. Therefore, the system has no solution. Graphing the system reveals two 
parallel lines. See Figure 1. 

Access for free at openstax.org



11.8 • Solving Systems with Cramer's Rule     1099

Figure 1 

EXAMPLE 6 

Use Cramer’s Rule to Solve a Dependent System 
Solve the system with an infinite number of solutions. 

Solution 

Let’s find the determinant first. Set up a matrix augmented by the first two columns. 

Then, 

As the determinant equals zero, there is either no solution or an infinite number of solutions. We have to perform 
elimination to find out. 
1. Multiply equation (1) by  and add the result to equation (3): 

2. Obtaining an answer of  a statement that is always true, means that the system has an infinite number of 
solutions. Graphing the system, we can see that two of the planes are the same and they both intersect the third 
plane on a line. See Figure 2. 



1100     11 • Systems of Equations and Inequalities

Figure 2 

Understanding Properties of Determinants 
There are many properties of determinants. Listed here are some properties that may be helpful in calculating the 
determinant of a matrix. 

Properties of Determinants 

1. If the matrix is in upper triangular form, the determinant equals the product of entries down the main diagonal. 
2. When two rows are interchanged, the determinant changes sign. 
3. If either two rows or two columns are identical, the determinant equals zero. 
4. If a matrix contains either a row of zeros or a column of zeros, the determinant equals zero. 
5. The determinant of an inverse matrix  is the reciprocal of the determinant of the matrix 
6. If any row or column is multiplied by a constant, the determinant is multiplied by the same factor. 

EXAMPLE 7 

Illustrating Properties of Determinants 
Illustrate each of the properties of determinants. 

Solution 
Property 1 states that if the matrix is in upper triangular form, the determinant is the product of the entries down the 
main diagonal. 

Augment  with the first two columns. 

Then 

Property 2 states that interchanging rows changes the sign. Given 

Access for free at openstax.org



11.8 • Solving Systems with Cramer's Rule     1101

Property 3 states that if two rows or two columns are identical, the determinant equals zero. 

Property 4 states that if a row or column equals zero, the determinant equals zero. Thus, 

Property 5 states that the determinant of an inverse matrix  is the reciprocal of the determinant  Thus, 

Property 6 states that if any row or column of a matrix is multiplied by a constant, the determinant is multiplied by the 
same factor. Thus, 

EXAMPLE 8 

Using Cramer’s Rule and Determinant Properties to Solve a System 
Find the solution to the given 3 × 3 system. 

Solution 
Using Cramer’s Rule, we have 

Notice that the second and third columns are identical. According to Property 3, the determinant will be zero, so there is 
either no solution or an infinite number of solutions. We have to perform elimination to find out. 
1. Multiply equation (3) by –2 and add the result to equation (1). 

Obtaining a statement that is a contradiction means that the system has no solution. 



1102     11 • Systems of Equations and Inequalities

 MEDIA 

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with Cramer’s Rule. 

Solve a System of Two Equations Using Cramer's Rule (https://openstax.org/l/system2cramer) 
Solve a Systems of Three Equations using Cramer's Rule (https://openstax.org/l/system3cramer) 

 11.8 SECTION EXERCISES 
Verbal 

1 . Explain why we can always  2 . Examining Cramer’s Rule,  3 . Explain what it means in 
evaluate the determinant of explain why there is no terms of an inverse for a 
a square matrix. unique solution to the matrix to have a 0 

system when the determinant. 
determinant of your matrix 
is 0. For simplicity, use a 

 matrix. 
4 . The determinant of 

matrix  is 3. If you switch 
the rows and multiply the 
first row by 6 and the 
second row by 2, explain 
how to find the determinant 
and provide the answer. 

Algebraic 

For the following exercises, find the determinant. 

5 .  6 .  7 . 

8 .  9 .  10 . 

11 .  12 .  13 . 

14 .  15 .  16 . 

17 .  18 .  19 . 

20 .  21 .  22 . 

23 .  24 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



11.8 • Solving Systems with Cramer's Rule     1103

For the following exercises, solve the system of linear equations using Cramer’s Rule. 

25 .  26 .  27 . 

28 .  29 .  30 . 

31 .  32 .  33 . 

34 . 

For the following exercises, solve the system of linear equations using Cramer’s Rule. 

35 .  36 .  37 . 

38 .  39 .  40 . 

41 .  42 .  43 . 

44 . 

Technology 

For the following exercises, use the determinant function on a graphing utility. 

45 .  46 .  47 . 

48 . 

Real-World Applications 

For the following exercises, create a system of linear equations to describe the behavior. Then, calculate the determinant. 
Will there be a unique solution? If so, find the unique solution. 
49 . Two numbers add up to 56.  50 . Two numbers add up to  51 . Three numbers add up to 

One number is 20 less than 104. If you add two times 106. The first number is 3 
the other. the first number plus two less than the second 

times the second number, number. The third number 
your total is 208 is 4 more than the first 

number. 



1104     11 • Systems of Equations and Inequalities

52 . Three numbers add to 216. 
The sum of the first two 
numbers is 112. The third 
number is 8 less than the 
first two numbers 
combined. 

For the following exercises, create a system of linear equations to describe the behavior. Then, solve the system for all 
solutions using Cramer’s Rule. 
53 . You invest $10,000 into two  54 . You invest $80,000 into two  55 . A theater needs to know 

accounts, which receive 8% accounts, $22,000 in one how many adult tickets and 
interest and 5% interest. At account, and $58,000 in children tickets were sold 
the end of a year, you had the other account. At the out of the 1,200 total 
$10,710 in your combined end of one year, assuming tickets. If children’s tickets 
accounts. How much was simple interest, you have are $5.95, adult tickets are 
invested in each account? earned $2,470 in interest. $11.15, and the total 

The second account amount of revenue was 
receives half a percent less $12,756, how many 
than twice the interest on children’s tickets and adult 
the first account. What are tickets were sold? 
the interest rates for your 
accounts? 

56 . A concert venue sells single  57 . You decide to paint your  58 . You sold two types of 
tickets for $40 each and kitchen green. You create scarves at a farmers’ 
couple’s tickets for $65. If the color of paint by mixing market and would like to 
the total revenue was yellow and blue paints. You know which one was more 
$18,090 and the 321 tickets cannot remember how popular. The total number 
were sold, how many many gallons of each color of scarves sold was 56, the 
single tickets and how went into your mix, but yellow scarf cost $10, and 
many couple’s tickets were you know there were 10 the purple scarf cost $11. If 
sold? gal total. Additionally, you you had total revenue of 

kept your receipt, and $583, how many yellow 
know the total amount scarves and how many 
spent was $29.50. If each purple scarves were sold? 
gallon of yellow costs 
$2.59, and each gallon of 
blue costs $3.19, how 
many gallons of each color 
go into your green mix? 

59 . Your garden produced two  60 . At a market, the three  61 . At the same market, the 
types of tomatoes, one most popular vegetables three most popular fruits 
green and one red. The red make up 53% of vegetable make up 37% of the total 
weigh 10 oz, and the green sales. Corn has 4% higher fruit sold. Strawberries sell 
weigh 4 oz. You have 30 sales than broccoli, which twice as much as oranges, 
tomatoes, and a total has 5% more sales than and kiwis sell one more 
weight of 13 lb, 14 oz. How onions. What percentage percentage point than 
many of each type of does each vegetable have oranges. For each fruit, 
tomato do you have? in the market share? find the percentage of total 

fruit sold. 

Access for free at openstax.org



11.8 • Solving Systems with Cramer's Rule     1105

62 . Three artists performed at  63 . A movie theatre sold 
a concert venue. The first tickets to three movies. The 
one charged $15 per ticket, tickets to the first movie 
the second artist charged were $5, the tickets to the 
$45 per ticket, and the final second movie were $11, 
one charged $22 per ticket. and the third movie was 
There were 510 tickets $12. 100 tickets were sold 
sold, for a total of $12,700. to the first movie. The total 
If the first band had 40 number of tickets sold was 
more audience members 642, for a total revenue of 
than the second band, how $6,774. How many tickets 
many tickets were sold for for each movie were sold? 
each band? 

For the following exercises, use this scenario: A health-conscious company decides to make a trail mix out of almonds, 
dried cranberries, and chocolate-covered cashews. The nutritional information for these items is shown in Table 1. 

Fat (g) Protein (g) Carbohydrates (g) 

Almonds (10) 6 2 3 

Cranberries (10) 0.02 0 8 

Cashews (10) 7 3.5 5.5 

Table 1 

64 . For the special “low-  65 . For the “hiking” mix, there  66 . For the “energy-booster” 
carb”trail mix, there are are 1,000 pieces in the mix, mix, there are 1,000 pieces 
1,000 pieces of mix. The containing 390.8 g of fat, in the mix, containing 145 
total number of and 165 g of protein. If g of protein and 625 g of 
carbohydrates is 425 g, there is the same amount carbohydrates. If the 
and the total amount of fat of almonds as cashews, number of almonds and 
is 570.2 g. If there are 200 how many of each item is cashews summed together 
more pieces of cashews in the trail mix? is equivalent to the amount 
than cranberries, how of cranberries, how many 
many of each item is in the of each item is in the trail 
trail mix? mix? 



1106     11 • Chapter Review

Chapter Review 
Key Terms 
addition method  an algebraic technique used to solve systems of linear equations in which the equations are added in 

a way that eliminates one variable, allowing the resulting equation to be solved for the remaining variable; 
substitution is then used to solve for the first variable 

augmented matrix  a coefficient matrix adjoined with the constant column separated by a vertical line within the 
matrix brackets 

break-even point  the point at which a cost function intersects a revenue function; where profit is zero 
coefficient matrix  a matrix that contains only the coefficients from a system of equations 
column  a set of numbers aligned vertically in a matrix 
consistent system  a system for which there is a single solution to all equations in the system and it is an independent 

system, or if there are an infinite number of solutions and it is a dependent system 
cost function  the function used to calculate the costs of doing business; it usually has two parts, fixed costs and 

variable costs 
Cramer’s Rule  a method for solving systems of equations that have the same number of equations as variables using 

determinants 
dependent system  a system of linear equations in which the two equations represent the same line; there are an 

infinite number of solutions to a dependent system 
determinant  a number calculated using the entries of a square matrix that determines such information as whether 

there is a solution to a system of equations 
entry  an element, coefficient, or constant in a matrix 
feasible region  the solution to a system of nonlinear inequalities that is the region of the graph where the shaded 

regions of each inequality intersect 
Gaussian elimination  using elementary row operations to obtain a matrix in row-echelon form 
identity matrix  a square matrix containing ones down the main diagonal and zeros everywhere else; it acts as a 1 in 

matrix algebra 
inconsistent system  a system of linear equations with no common solution because they represent parallel lines, 

which have no point or line in common 
independent system  a system of linear equations with exactly one solution pair 
main diagonal  entries from the upper left corner diagonally to the lower right corner of a square matrix 
matrix  a rectangular array of numbers 
multiplicative inverse of a matrix  a matrix that, when multiplied by the original, equals the identity matrix 
nonlinear inequality  an inequality containing a nonlinear expression 
partial fraction decomposition  the process of returning a simplified rational expression to its original form, a sum or 

difference of simpler rational expressions 
partial fractions  the individual fractions that make up the sum or difference of a rational expression before combining 

them into a simplified rational expression 
profit function  the profit function is written as  revenue minus cost 
revenue function  the function that is used to calculate revenue, simply written as  where  quantity and 

price 
row  a set of numbers aligned horizontally in a matrix 
row operations  adding one row to another row, multiplying a row by a constant, interchanging rows, and so on, with 

the goal of achieving row-echelon form 
row-echelon form  after performing row operations, the matrix form that contains ones down the main diagonal and 

zeros at every space below the diagonal 
row-equivalent  two matrices  and  are row-equivalent if one can be obtained from the other by performing basic 

row operations 
scalar multiple  an entry of a matrix that has been multiplied by a scalar 
solution set  the set of all ordered pairs or triples that satisfy all equations in a system of equations 
substitution method  an algebraic technique used to solve systems of linear equations in which one of the two 

equations is solved for one variable and then substituted into the second equation to solve for the second variable 
system of linear equations  a set of two or more equations in two or more variables that must be considered 

simultaneously. 
system of nonlinear equations  a system of equations containing at least one equation that is of degree larger than 

one 
system of nonlinear inequalities  a system of two or more inequalities in two or more variables containing at least 

one inequality that is not linear 

Access for free at openstax.org



11 • Chapter Review     1107

Key Equations 

Identity matrix for a  matrix 

Identity matrix for a  matrix 

Multiplicative inverse of a  matrix 

Key Concepts 
11.1 Systems of Linear Equations: Two Variables 

• A system of linear equations consists of two or more equations made up of two or more variables such that all 
equations in the system are considered simultaneously. 

• The solution to a system of linear equations in two variables is any ordered pair that satisfies each equation 
independently. See Example 1. 

• Systems of equations are classified as independent with one solution, dependent with an infinite number of 
solutions, or inconsistent with no solution. 

• One method of solving a system of linear equations in two variables is by graphing. In this method, we graph the 
equations on the same set of axes. See Example 2. 

• Another method of solving a system of linear equations is by substitution. In this method, we solve for one variable 
in one equation and substitute the result into the second equation. See Example 3. 

• A third method of solving a system of linear equations is by addition, in which we can eliminate a variable by adding 
opposite coefficients of corresponding variables. See Example 4. 

• It is often necessary to multiply one or both equations by a constant to facilitate elimination of a variable when 
adding the two equations together. See Example 5, Example 6, and Example 7. 

• Either method of solving a system of equations results in a false statement for inconsistent systems because they 
are made up of parallel lines that never intersect. See Example 8. 

• The solution to a system of dependent equations will always be true because both equations describe the same line. 
See Example 9. 

• Systems of equations can be used to solve real-world problems that involve more than one variable, such as those 
relating to revenue, cost, and profit. See Example 10 and Example 11. 

11.2 Systems of Linear Equations: Three Variables 
• A solution set is an ordered triple  that represents the intersection of three planes in space. See 

Example 1. 
• A system of three equations in three variables can be solved by using a series of steps that forces a variable to be 

eliminated. The steps include interchanging the order of equations, multiplying both sides of an equation by a 
nonzero constant, and adding a nonzero multiple of one equation to another equation. See Example 2. 

• Systems of three equations in three variables are useful for solving many different types of real-world problems. See 
Example 3. 

• A system of equations in three variables is inconsistent if no solution exists. After performing elimination 
operations, the result is a contradiction. See Example 4. 

• Systems of equations in three variables that are inconsistent could result from three parallel planes, two parallel 
planes and one intersecting plane, or three planes that intersect the other two but not at the same location. 

• A system of equations in three variables is dependent if it has an infinite number of solutions. After performing 
elimination operations, the result is an identity. See Example 5. 

• Systems of equations in three variables that are dependent could result from three identical planes, three planes 
intersecting at a line, or two identical planes that intersect the third on a line. 

11.3 Systems of Nonlinear Equations and Inequalities: Two Variables 
• There are three possible types of solutions to a system of equations representing a line and a parabola: (1) no 

solution, the line does not intersect the parabola; (2) one solution, the line is tangent to the parabola; and (3) two 



1108     11 • Chapter Review

solutions, the line intersects the parabola in two points. See Example 1. 
• There are three possible types of solutions to a system of equations representing a circle and a line: (1) no solution, 

the line does not intersect the circle; (2) one solution, the line is tangent to the circle; (3) two solutions, the line 
intersects the circle in two points. See Example 2. 

• There are five possible types of solutions to the system of nonlinear equations representing an ellipse and a circle: 
(1) no solution, the circle and the ellipse do not intersect; (2) one solution, the circle and the ellipse are tangent to 
each other; (3) two solutions, the circle and the ellipse intersect in two points; (4) three solutions, the circle and 
ellipse intersect in three places; (5) four solutions, the circle and the ellipse intersect in four points. See Example 3. 

• An inequality is graphed in much the same way as an equation, except for > or <, we draw a dashed line and shade 
the region containing the solution set. See Example 4. 

• Inequalities are solved the same way as equalities, but solutions to systems of inequalities must satisfy both 
inequalities. See Example 5. 

11.4 Partial Fractions 
• Decompose  by writing the partial fractions as  Solve by clearing the fractions, expanding the 

right side, collecting like terms, and setting corresponding coefficients equal to each other, then setting up and 
solving a system of equations. See Example 1. 

• The decomposition of  with repeated linear factors must account for the factors of the denominator in 
increasing powers. See Example 2. 

• The decomposition of  with a nonrepeated irreducible quadratic factor needs a linear numerator over the 
quadratic factor, as in  See Example 3. 

• In the decomposition of  where  has a repeated irreducible quadratic factor, when the irreducible 
quadratic factors are repeated, powers of the denominator factors must be represented in increasing powers as 

See Example 4. 

11.5 Matrices and Matrix Operations 
• A matrix is a rectangular array of numbers. Entries are arranged in rows and columns. 
• The dimensions of a matrix refer to the number of rows and the number of columns. A  matrix has three rows 

and two columns. See Example 1. 
• We add and subtract matrices of equal dimensions by adding and subtracting corresponding entries of each matrix. 

See Example 2, Example 3, Example 4, and Example 5. 
• Scalar multiplication involves multiplying each entry in a matrix by a constant. See Example 6. 
• Scalar multiplication is often required before addition or subtraction can occur. See Example 7. 
• Multiplying matrices is possible when inner dimensions are the same—the number of columns in the first matrix 

must match the number of rows in the second. 
• The product of two matrices,  and  is obtained by multiplying each entry in row 1 of  by each entry in column 1 

of  then multiply each entry of row 1 of  by each entry in columns 2 of  and so on. See Example 8 and Example 
9. 

• Many real-world problems can often be solved using matrices. See Example 10. 
• We can use a calculator to perform matrix operations after saving each matrix as a matrix variable. See Example 11. 

11.6 Solving Systems with Gaussian Elimination 
• An augmented matrix is one that contains the coefficients and constants of a system of equations. See Example 1. 
• A matrix augmented with the constant column can be represented as the original system of equations. See Example 

2. 
• Row operations include multiplying a row by a constant, adding one row to another row, and interchanging rows. 
• We can use Gaussian elimination to solve a system of equations. See Example 3, Example 4, and Example 5. 
• Row operations are performed on matrices to obtain row-echelon form. See Example 6. 
• To solve a system of equations, write it in augmented matrix form. Perform row operations to obtain row-echelon 

form. Back-substitute to find the solutions. See Example 7 and Example 8. 
• A calculator can be used to solve systems of equations using matrices. See Example 9. 
• Many real-world problems can be solved using augmented matrices. See Example 10 and Example 11. 

Access for free at openstax.org



11 • Exercises     1109

11.7 Solving Systems with Inverses 
• An identity matrix has the property  See Example 1. 
• An invertible matrix has the property  See Example 2. 
• Use matrix multiplication and the identity to find the inverse of a  matrix. See Example 3. 
• The multiplicative inverse can be found using a formula. See Example 4. 
• Another method of finding the inverse is by augmenting with the identity. See Example 5. 
• We can augment a  matrix with the identity on the right and use row operations to turn the original matrix into 

the identity, and the matrix on the right becomes the inverse. See Example 6. 
• Write the system of equations as  and multiply both sides by the inverse of  See 

Example 7 and Example 8. 
• We can also use a calculator to solve a system of equations with matrix inverses. See Example 9. 

11.8 Solving Systems with Cramer's Rule 

• The determinant for  is  See Example 1. 

• Cramer’s Rule replaces a variable column with the constant column. Solutions are  See Example 2. 
• To find the determinant of a 3×3 matrix, augment with the first two columns. Add the three diagonal entries (upper 

left to lower right) and subtract the three diagonal entries (lower left to upper right). See Example 3. 
• To solve a system of three equations in three variables using Cramer’s Rule, replace a variable column with the 

constant column for each desired solution:  See Example 4. 
• Cramer’s Rule is also useful for finding the solution of a system of equations with no solution or infinite solutions. 

See Example 5 and Example 6. 
• Certain properties of determinants are useful for solving problems. For example: 

◦ If the matrix is in upper triangular form, the determinant equals the product of entries down the main diagonal. 
◦ When two rows are interchanged, the determinant changes sign. 
◦ If either two rows or two columns are identical, the determinant equals zero. 
◦ If a matrix contains either a row of zeros or a column of zeros, the determinant equals zero. 
◦ The determinant of an inverse matrix  is the reciprocal of the determinant of the matrix 
◦ If any row or column is multiplied by a constant, the determinant is multiplied by the same factor. See Example 7 

and Example 8. 

Exercises 
Review Exercises 
Systems of Linear Equations: Two Variables 
For the following exercises, determine whether the ordered pair is a solution to the system of equations. 

1 .  and  2 .  and 

For the following exercises, use substitution to solve the system of equations. 

3 .  4 .  5 . 

For the following exercises, use addition to solve the system of equations. 

6 .  7 .  8 . 



1110     11 • Exercises

For the following exercises, write a system of equations to solve each problem. Solve the system of equations. 
9 . A factory has a cost of  10 . A performer charges 

production 
 and a where  is the total 

revenue function number of attendees at a 
 What is the show. The venue charges 

break-even point? $75 per ticket. After how 
many people buy tickets 
does the venue break even, 
and what is the value of 
the total tickets sold at that 
point? 

Systems of Linear Equations: Three Variables 

For the following exercises, solve the system of three equations using substitution or addition. 

11 .  12 .  13 . 

14 .  15 .  16 . 

17 .  18 . 

For the following exercises, write a system of equations to solve each problem. Solve the system of equations. 
19 . Three odd numbers sum  20 . A local theatre sells out for 

up to 61. The smaller is their show. They sell all 500 
one-third the larger and tickets for a total purse of 
the middle number is 16 $8,070.00. The tickets were 
less than the larger. What priced at $15 for students, 
are the three numbers? $12 for children, and $18 

for adults. If the band sold 
three times as many adult 
tickets as children’s tickets, 
how many of each type 
was sold? 

Systems of Nonlinear Equations and Inequalities: Two Variables 

For the following exercises, solve the system of nonlinear equations. 

21 .  22 .  23 . 

24 .  25 . 

For the following exercises, graph the inequality. 

26 .  27 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



11 • Exercises     1111

For the following exercises, graph the system of inequalities. 

28 .  29 . 30 . 

Partial Fractions 

For the following exercises, decompose into partial fractions. 

31 .  32 .  33 . 

34 .  35 .  36 . 

37 .  38 . 

Matrices and Matrix Operations 

For the following exercises, perform the requested operations on the given matrices. 

39 .  40 .  41 . 
42 .  43 .  44 . 
45 .  46 .  47 . 

48 .  49 .  50 . 

Solving Systems with Gaussian Elimination 

For the following exercises, write the system of linear equations from the augmented matrix. Indicate whether there will 
be a unique solution. 

51 .  52 . 

For the following exercises, write the augmented matrix from the system of linear equations. 

53 .  54 .  55 . 

For the following exercises, solve the system of linear equations using Gaussian elimination. 

56 .  57 .  58 . 

59 .  60 . 

Solving Systems with Inverses 

For the following exercises, find the inverse of the matrix. 

61 .  62 .  63 . 



1112     11 • Exercises

64 . 

For the following exercises, find the solutions by computing the inverse of the matrix. 

65 .  66 .  67 . 

68 . 

For the following exercises, write a system of equations to solve each problem. Solve the system of equations. 
69 . Students were asked to bring their favorite fruit to  70 . A school club held a bake sale to raise money and 

class. 90% of the fruits consisted of banana, apple, sold brownies and chocolate chip cookies. They 
and oranges. If oranges were half as popular as priced the brownies at $2 and the chocolate chip 
bananas and apples were 5% more popular than cookies at $1. They raised $250 and sold 175 
bananas, what are the percentages of each items. How many brownies and how many cookies 
individual fruit? were sold? 

Solving Systems with Cramer's Rule 

For the following exercises, find the determinant. 

71 .  72 .  73 . 

74 . 

For the following exercises, use Cramer’s Rule to solve the linear systems of equations. 

75 .  76 .  77 . 

78 .  79 .  80 . 

Practice Test 
Is the following ordered pair a solution to the system of equations? 

1 .  with 

Access for free at openstax.org



11 • Exercises     1113

For the following exercises, solve the systems of linear and nonlinear equations using substitution or elimination. 
Indicate if no solution exists. 

2 .  3 .  4 . 

5 .  6 .  7 . 

8 .  9 . 

For the following exercises, graph the following inequalities. 

10 .  11 . 

For the following exercises, write the partial fraction decomposition. 

12 .  13 .  14 . 

For the following exercises, perform the given matrix operations. 

15 .  16 .  17 . 

18 .  19 .  20 . If  what would 
be the determinant if you 
switched rows 1 and 3, 
multiplied the second row 
by 12, and took the 
inverse? 

21 . Rewrite the system of  22 . Rewrite the augmented 
linear equations as an matrix as a system of linear 
augmented matrix. equations. 

For the following exercises, use Gaussian elimination to solve the systems of equations. 

23 .  24 . 

For the following exercises, use the inverse of a matrix to solve the systems of equations. 

25 .  26 . 



1114     11 • Exercises

For the following exercises, use Cramer’s Rule to solve the systems of equations. 

27 .  28 . 

For the following exercises, solve using a system of linear equations. 
29 . A factory producing cell phones has the following  30 . A small fair charges $1.50 for students, $1 for 

cost and revenue functions: children, and $2 for adults. In one day, three times 
 and as many children as adults attended. A total of 

What is the range of cell phones they should 800 tickets were sold for a total revenue of $1,050. 
produce each day so there is profit? Round to the How many of each type of ticket was sold? 
nearest number that generates profit. 

Access for free at openstax.org



12 • Introduction to Analytic Geometry          1115

12 ANALYTIC GEOMETRY 

The rings of Saturn have produced wonder, as well as misunderstanding, since Galileo first discovered them (he initially 
thought they were moons). Though they appear to be a series of solid discs even in this 2004 closeup from the Cassini 
probe, 19th century mathematicians proved that they are made up of billions of small objects clustered together. (credit: 
modification of "Saturn" by NASA/JPL-Caltech/SSI/Kevin M. Gill/flickr) 

Chapter Outline 
12.1 The Ellipse 
12.2 The Hyperbola 
12.3 The Parabola 
12.4 Rotation of Axes 
12.5 Conic Sections in Polar Coordinates 

Introduction to Analytic Geometry 
The Greek mathematician Menaechmus (c. 380–c. 320 BCE) is generally credited with discovering the shapes formed by 
the intersection of a plane and a right circular cone. Depending on how he tilted the plane when it intersected the cone, 
he formed different shapes at the intersection–beautiful shapes with near-perfect symmetry. 
It was also said that Aristotle may have had an intuitive understanding of these shapes, as he observed the orbit of the 
planet to be circular. He presumed that the planets moved in circular orbits around Earth, and for nearly 2000 years this 
was the commonly held belief. 
It was not until the Renaissance movement that Johannes Kepler noticed that the orbits of the planet were not circular in 
nature. His published law of planetary motion in the 1600s changed our view of the solar system forever. He claimed that 
the sun was at one end of the orbits, and the planets revolved around the sun in an oval-shaped path. 
Other objects in the solar system (and perhaps other systems) follow a similar elliptical path, including the spectacular 
rings of Saturn. Using this understanding as a basis, 19th century mathematicians like James Clerk Maxwell and Sofya 
Kovalevskaya showed that despite their appearance through the telescopes of the day (and even in current telescopes), 
the rings are not solid and continuous, but are rather composed of small particles. Even after the Voyager and Cassini 
missions have provided close-up and detailed data regarding the ring structures, full understanding of their construction 
relies heavily on mathematical analysis. Of particular interest are the influences of Saturn's moons and moonlets, and 
the ways they both disrupt and preserve the ring structure. 
In this chapter, we will investigate the two-dimensional figures that are formed when a right circular cone is intersected 
by a plane. We will begin by studying each of three figures created in this manner. We will develop defining equations for 
each figure and then learn how to use these equations to solve a variety of problems. 



1116     12 • Analytic Geometry

12.1 The Ellipse 
Learning Objectives 
In this section, you will: 

Write equations of ellipses in standard form. 
Graph ellipses centered at the origin. 
Graph ellipses not centered at the origin. 
Solve applied problems involving ellipses. 

Figure 1 The National Statuary Hall in Washington, D.C. (credit: Greg Palmer, Flickr) 
Can you imagine standing at one end of a large room and still being able to hear a whisper from a person standing at 
the other end? The National Statuary Hall in Washington, D.C., shown in Figure 1, is such a room.1  It is an semi-circular 
room called a whispering chamber because the shape makes it possible for sound to travel along the walls and dome. In 
this section, we will investigate the shape of this room and its real-world applications, including how far apart two people 
in Statuary Hall can stand and still hear each other whisper. 

Writing Equations of Ellipses in Standard Form 
A conic section, or conic, is a shape resulting from intersecting a right circular cone with a plane. The angle at which the 
plane intersects the cone determines the shape, as shown in Figure 2. 

Figure 2 
Conic sections can also be described by a set of points in the coordinate plane. Later in this chapter, we will see that the 
graph of any quadratic equation in two variables is a conic section. The signs of the equations and the coefficients of the 
variable terms determine the shape. This section focuses on the four variations of the standard form of the equation for 
the ellipse. An ellipse is the set of all points  in a plane such that the sum of their distances from two fixed points is 
a constant. Each fixed point is called a focus (plural: foci). 
We can draw an ellipse using a piece of cardboard, two thumbtacks, a pencil, and string. Place the thumbtacks in the 

1 Architect of the Capitol. http://www.aoc.gov. Accessed April 15, 2014. 

Access for free at openstax.org



12.1 • The Ellipse     1117

cardboard to form the foci of the ellipse. Cut a piece of string longer than the distance between the two thumbtacks (the 
length of the string represents the constant in the definition). Tack each end of the string to the cardboard, and trace a 
curve with a pencil held taut against the string. The result is an ellipse. See Figure 3. 

Figure 3 
Every ellipse has two axes of symmetry. The longer axis is called the major axis, and the shorter axis is called the minor 
axis. Each endpoint of the major axis is the vertex of the ellipse (plural: vertices), and each endpoint of the minor axis is 
a co-vertex of the ellipse. The center of an ellipse is the midpoint of both the major and minor axes. The axes are 
perpendicular at the center. The foci always lie on the major axis, and the sum of the distances from the foci to any point 
on the ellipse (the constant sum) is greater than the distance between the foci. See Figure 4. 

Figure 4 
In this section, we restrict ellipses to those that are positioned vertically or horizontally in the coordinate plane. That is, 
the axes will either lie on or be parallel to the x- and y-axes. Later in the chapter, we will see ellipses that are rotated in 
the coordinate plane. 
To work with horizontal and vertical ellipses in the coordinate plane, we consider two cases: those that are centered at 
the origin and those that are centered at a point other than the origin. First we will learn to derive the equations of 
ellipses, and then we will learn how to write the equations of ellipses in standard form. Later we will use what we learn to 
draw the graphs. 

Deriving the Equation of an Ellipse Centered at the Origin 
To derive the equation of an ellipse centered at the origin, we begin with the foci  and  The ellipse is the set 
of all points  such that the sum of the distances from  to the foci is constant, as shown in Figure 5. 



1118     12 • Analytic Geometry

Figure 5 
If  is a vertex of the ellipse, the distance from  to  is  The distance from  to  is 

 . The sum of the distances from the foci to the vertex is 

If  is a point on the ellipse, then we can define the following variables: 

By the definition of an ellipse,  is constant for any point  on the ellipse. We know that the sum of these 
distances is  for the vertex  It follows that  for any point on the ellipse. We will begin the derivation 
by applying the distance formula. The rest of the derivation is algebraic. 

Thus, the standard equation of an ellipse is  This equation defines an ellipse centered at the origin. If 
 the ellipse is stretched further in the horizontal direction, and if  the ellipse is stretched further in the 

vertical direction. 

Writing Equations of Ellipses Centered at the Origin in Standard Form 
Standard forms of equations tell us about key features of graphs. Take a moment to recall some of the standard forms of 
equations we’ve worked with in the past: linear, quadratic, cubic, exponential, logarithmic, and so on. By learning to 
interpret standard forms of equations, we are bridging the relationship between algebraic and geometric 
representations of mathematical phenomena. 

Access for free at openstax.org



12.1 • The Ellipse     1119

The key features of the ellipse are its center, vertices, co-vertices, foci, and lengths and positions of the major and minor 
axes. Just as with other equations, we can identify all of these features just by looking at the standard form of the 
equation. There are four variations of the standard form of the ellipse. These variations are categorized first by the 
location of the center (the origin or not the origin), and then by the position (horizontal or vertical). Each is presented 
along with a description of how the parts of the equation relate to the graph. Interpreting these parts allows us to form a 
mental picture of the ellipse. 

Standard Forms of the Equation of an Ellipse with Center (0,0) 

The standard form of the equation of an ellipse with center  and major axis on the x-axis is 

where 

• 
• the length of the major axis is 
• the coordinates of the vertices are 
• the length of the minor axis is 
• the coordinates of the co-vertices are 
• the coordinates of the foci are  , where  See Figure 6 a 

The standard form of the equation of an ellipse with center  and major axis on the y-axis is 

where 

• 
• the length of the major axis is 
• the coordinates of the vertices are 
• the length of the minor axis is 
• the coordinates of the co-vertices are 
• the coordinates of the foci are  , where  See Figure 6 b 

Note that the vertices, co-vertices, and foci are related by the equation  When we are given the 
coordinates of the foci and vertices of an ellipse, we can use this relationship to find the equation of the ellipse in 
standard form. 

Figure 6 (a) Horizontal ellipse with center  (b) Vertical ellipse with center 



1120     12 • Analytic Geometry

...
HOW TO 

Given the vertices and foci of an ellipse centered at the origin, write its equation in standard form. 

1. Determine whether the major axis lies on the x- or y-axis. 
a. If the given coordinates of the vertices and foci have the form  and  respectively, then the 

major axis is the x-axis. Use the standard form 
b. If the given coordinates of the vertices and foci have the form  and  respectively, then the 

major axis is the y-axis. Use the standard form 

2. Use the equation  along with the given coordinates of the vertices and foci, to solve for 
3. Substitute the values for  and  into the standard form of the equation determined in Step 1. 

EXAMPLE 1 

Writing the Equation of an Ellipse Centered at the Origin in Standard Form 
What is the standard form equation of the ellipse that has vertices  and foci 

Solution 
The foci are on the x-axis, so the major axis is the x-axis. Thus, the equation will have the form 

The vertices are  so  and 

The foci are  so  and 

We know that the vertices and foci are related by the equation  Solving for  we have: 

Now we need only substitute  and  into the standard form of the equation. The equation of the ellipse is 

 TRY IT #1 What is the standard form equation of the ellipse that has vertices  and foci 

 Q&A Can we write the equation of an ellipse centered at the origin given coordinates of just one focus 
and vertex? 

Yes. Ellipses are symmetrical, so the coordinates of the vertices of an ellipse centered around the origin 
will always have the form  or  Similarly, the coordinates of the foci will always have the 
form  or  Knowing this, we can use  and  from the given points, along with the 
equation  to find 

Writing Equations of Ellipses Not Centered at the Origin 
Like the graphs of other equations, the graph of an ellipse can be translated. If an ellipse is translated  units 
horizontally and  units vertically, the center of the ellipse will be  This translation results in the standard form of 
the equation we saw previously, with  replaced by  and y replaced by 

Access for free at openstax.org



12.1 • The Ellipse     1121

Standard Forms of the Equation of an Ellipse with Center (h, k) 

The standard form of the equation of an ellipse with center  and major axis parallel to the x-axis is 

where 

• 
• the length of the major axis is 
• the coordinates of the vertices are 
• the length of the minor axis is 
• the coordinates of the co-vertices are 
• the coordinates of the foci are  where  See Figure 7a 

The standard form of the equation of an ellipse with center  and major axis parallel to the y-axis is 

where 

• 
• the length of the major axis is 
• the coordinates of the vertices are 
• the length of the minor axis is 
• the coordinates of the co-vertices are 
• the coordinates of the foci are  where  See Figure 7b 

Just as with ellipses centered at the origin, ellipses that are centered at a point  have vertices, co-vertices, and 
foci that are related by the equation  We can use this relationship along with the midpoint and distance 
formulas to find the equation of the ellipse in standard form when the vertices and foci are given. 

Figure 7 (a) Horizontal ellipse with center  (b) Vertical ellipse with center 

...
HOW TO 

Given the vertices and foci of an ellipse not centered at the origin, write its equation in standard form. 

1. Determine whether the major axis is parallel to the x- or y-axis. 
a. If the y-coordinates of the given vertices and foci are the same, then the major axis is parallel to the x-axis. 



1122     12 • Analytic Geometry

Use the standard form 
b. If the x-coordinates of the given vertices and foci are the same, then the major axis is parallel to the y-axis. 

Use the standard form 

2. Identify the center of the ellipse  using the midpoint formula and the given coordinates for the vertices. 
3. Find  by solving for the length of the major axis,  which is the distance between the given vertices. 
4. Find  using  and  found in Step 2, along with the given coordinates for the foci. 
5. Solve for  using the equation 
6. Substitute the values for  and  into the standard form of the equation determined in Step 1. 

EXAMPLE 2 

Writing the Equation of an Ellipse Centered at a Point Other Than the Origin 
What is the standard form equation of the ellipse that has vertices  and 
and foci  and 

Solution 
The x-coordinates of the vertices and foci are the same, so the major axis is parallel to the y-axis. Thus, the equation of 
the ellipse will have the form 

First, we identify the center,  The center is halfway between the vertices,  and  Applying the 
midpoint formula, we have: 

Next, we find  The length of the major axis,  is bounded by the vertices. We solve for  by finding the distance 
between the y-coordinates of the vertices. 

So 

Now we find  The foci are given by  So,  and  We substitute 
using either of these points to solve for 

So 

Next, we solve for  using the equation 

Finally, we substitute the values found for  and  into the standard form equation for an ellipse: 

Access for free at openstax.org



12.1 • The Ellipse     1123

 TRY IT #2 What is the standard form equation of the ellipse that has vertices  and  and foci 
 and 

Graphing Ellipses Centered at the Origin 
Just as we can write the equation for an ellipse given its graph, we can graph an ellipse given its equation. To graph 
ellipses centered at the origin, we use the standard form  for horizontal ellipses and 

 for vertical ellipses. 

...
HOW TO 

Given the standard form of an equation for an ellipse centered at  sketch the graph. 

1. Use the standard forms of the equations of an ellipse to determine the major axis, vertices, co-vertices, and foci. 
a. If the equation is in the form  where  then 

▪ the major axis is the x-axis 
▪ the coordinates of the vertices are 
▪ the coordinates of the co-vertices are 
▪ the coordinates of the foci are 

b. If the equation is in the form  where  then 
▪ the major axis is the y-axis 
▪ the coordinates of the vertices are 
▪ the coordinates of the co-vertices are 
▪ the coordinates of the foci are 

2. Solve for  using the equation 
3. Plot the center, vertices, co-vertices, and foci in the coordinate plane, and draw a smooth curve to form the 

ellipse. 

EXAMPLE 3 

Graphing an Ellipse Centered at the Origin 
Graph the ellipse given by the equation,  Identify and label the center, vertices, co-vertices, and foci. 

Solution 
First, we determine the position of the major axis. Because  the major axis is on the y-axis. Therefore, the 
equation is in the form  where  and  It follows that: 

• the center of the ellipse is 
• the coordinates of the vertices are 

• the coordinates of the co-vertices are 
• the coordinates of the foci are  where  Solving for  we have: 

Therefore, the coordinates of the foci are 



1124     12 • Analytic Geometry

Next, we plot and label the center, vertices, co-vertices, and foci, and draw a smooth curve to form the ellipse. See Figure 
8. 

Figure 8 

 TRY IT #3 Graph the ellipse given by the equation  Identify and label the center, vertices, co-
vertices, and foci. 

EXAMPLE 4 

Graphing an Ellipse Centered at the Origin from an Equation Not in Standard Form 
Graph the ellipse given by the equation  Rewrite the equation in standard form. Then identify and 
label the center, vertices, co-vertices, and foci. 

Solution 
First, use algebra to rewrite the equation in standard form. 

Next, we determine the position of the major axis. Because  the major axis is on the x-axis. Therefore, the 
equation is in the form  where  and  It follows that: 

• the center of the ellipse is 
• the coordinates of the vertices are 

• the coordinates of the co-vertices are 
• the coordinates of the foci are  where  Solving for  we have: 

Therefore the coordinates of the foci are 

Next, we plot and label the center, vertices, co-vertices, and foci, and draw a smooth curve to form the ellipse. 

Access for free at openstax.org



12.1 • The Ellipse     1125

Figure 9 

 TRY IT #4 Graph the ellipse given by the equation  Rewrite the equation in standard 
form. Then identify and label the center, vertices, co-vertices, and foci. 

Graphing Ellipses Not Centered at the Origin 
When an ellipse is not centered at the origin, we can still use the standard forms to find the key features of the graph. 
When the ellipse is centered at some point,  we use the standard forms  for horizontal 

ellipses and  for vertical ellipses. From these standard equations, we can easily determine 
the center, vertices, co-vertices, foci, and positions of the major and minor axes. 

...
HOW TO 

Given the standard form of an equation for an ellipse centered at  sketch the graph. 

1. Use the standard forms of the equations of an ellipse to determine the center, position of the major axis, vertices, 
co-vertices, and foci. 
a. If the equation is in the form  where  then 

▪ the center is 
▪ the major axis is parallel to the x-axis 
▪ the coordinates of the vertices are 
▪ the coordinates of the co-vertices are 
▪ the coordinates of the foci are 

b. If the equation is in the form  where  then 
▪ the center is 
▪ the major axis is parallel to the y-axis 
▪ the coordinates of the vertices are 
▪ the coordinates of the co-vertices are 
▪ the coordinates of the foci are 

2. Solve for  using the equation 
3. Plot the center, vertices, co-vertices, and foci in the coordinate plane, and draw a smooth curve to form the 

ellipse. 

EXAMPLE 5 

Graphing an Ellipse Centered at (h, k) 
Graph the ellipse given by the equation,  Identify and label the center, vertices, co-vertices, and foci. 



1126     12 • Analytic Geometry

Solution 
First, we determine the position of the major axis. Because  the major axis is parallel to the y-axis. Therefore, the 
equation is in the form  where  and  It follows that: 

• the center of the ellipse is 
• the coordinates of the vertices are  or  and 
• the coordinates of the co-vertices are  or  and 
• the coordinates of the foci are  where  Solving for  we have: 

Therefore, the coordinates of the foci are  and 

Next, we plot and label the center, vertices, co-vertices, and foci, and draw a smooth curve to form the ellipse. 

Figure 10 

 TRY IT #5 Graph the ellipse given by the equation  Identify and label the center, 
vertices, co-vertices, and foci. 

...
HOW TO 

Given the general form of an equation for an ellipse centered at (h, k), express the equation in standard form. 

1. Recognize that an ellipse described by an equation in the form  is in general form. 
2. Rearrange the equation by grouping terms that contain the same variable. Move the constant term to the 

opposite side of the equation. 
3. Factor out the coefficients of the  and  terms in preparation for completing the square. 
4. Complete the square for each variable to rewrite the equation in the form of the sum of multiples of two 

binomials squared set equal to a constant,  where  and  are constants. 
5. Divide both sides of the equation by the constant term to express the equation in standard form. 

EXAMPLE 6 

Graphing an Ellipse Centered at (h, k) by First Writing It in Standard Form 
Graph the ellipse given by the equation  Identify and label the center, vertices, co-

Access for free at openstax.org



12.1 • The Ellipse     1127

vertices, and foci. 

Solution 
We must begin by rewriting the equation in standard form. 

Group terms that contain the same variable, and move the constant to the opposite side of the equation. 

Factor out the coefficients of the squared terms. 

Complete the square twice. Remember to balance the equation by adding the same constants to each side. 

Rewrite as perfect squares. 

Divide both sides by the constant term to place the equation in standard form. 

Now that the equation is in standard form, we can determine the position of the major axis. Because  the major 
axis is parallel to the x-axis. Therefore, the equation is in the form  where  and  It 
follows that: 

• the center of the ellipse is 
• the coordinates of the vertices are  or  and 

• the coordinates of the co-vertices are  or  and 
• the coordinates of the foci are  where  Solving for  we have: 

Therefore, the coordinates of the foci are  and 

Next we plot and label the center, vertices, co-vertices, and foci, and draw a smooth curve to form the ellipse as shown in 
Figure 11. 

Figure 11 

 TRY IT #6 Express the equation of the ellipse given in standard form. Identify the center, vertices, co-
vertices, and foci of the ellipse. 



1128     12 • Analytic Geometry

Solving Applied Problems Involving Ellipses 
Many real-world situations can be represented by ellipses, including orbits of planets, satellites, moons and comets, and 
shapes of boat keels, rudders, and some airplane wings. A medical device called a lithotripter uses elliptical reflectors to 
break up kidney stones by generating sound waves. Some buildings, called whispering chambers, are designed with 
elliptical domes so that a person whispering at one focus can easily be heard by someone standing at the other focus. 
This occurs because of the acoustic properties of an ellipse. When a sound wave originates at one focus of a whispering 
chamber, the sound wave will be reflected off the elliptical dome and back to the other focus. See Figure 12. In the 
whisper chamber at the Museum of Science and Industry in Chicago, two people standing at the foci—about 43 feet 
apart—can hear each other whisper. When these chambers are placed in unexpected places, such as the ones inside 
Bush International Airport in Houston and Grand Central Terminal in New York City, they can induce surprised reactions 
among travelers. 

Figure 12 Sound waves are reflected between foci in an elliptical room, called a whispering chamber. 

EXAMPLE 7 

Locating the Foci of a Whispering Chamber 
A large room in an art gallery is a whispering chamber. Its dimensions are 46 feet wide by 96 feet long as shown in Figure 
13. 
a. What is the standard form of the equation of the ellipse representing the outline of the room? Hint: assume a 

horizontal ellipse, and let the center of the room be the point 
b. If two visitors standing at the foci of this room can hear each other whisper, how far apart are the two visitors? 

Round to the nearest foot. 

Figure 13 

Solution 
a. We are assuming a horizontal ellipse with center  so we need to find an equation of the form 

where  We know that the length of the major axis,  is longer than the length of the minor axis,  So the 
length of the room, 96, is represented by the major axis, and the width of the room, 46, is represented by the minor 
axis. 
◦ Solving for  we have  so  and 
◦ Solving for  we have  so  and 

Therefore, the equation of the ellipse is 

b. To find the distance between the senators, we must find the distance between the foci,  where 

Access for free at openstax.org



12.1 • The Ellipse     1129

Solving for  we have: 

The points  represent the foci. Thus, the distance between the senators is  feet. 

 TRY IT #7 Suppose a whispering chamber is 480 feet long and 320 feet wide. 

ⓐ  What is the standard form of the equation of the ellipse representing the room? Hint: assume 
a horizontal ellipse, and let the center of the room be the point 
ⓑ  If two people are standing at the foci of this room and can hear each other whisper, how far 
apart are the people? Round to the nearest foot. 

 MEDIA 

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with ellipses. 

Conic Sections: The Ellipse (https://openstax.org/l/conicellipse) 
Graph an Ellipse with Center at the Origin (https://openstax.org/l/grphellorigin) 
Graph an Ellipse with Center Not at the Origin (https://openstax.org/l/grphellnot) 

 12.1 SECTION EXERCISES 
Verbal 

1 . Define an ellipse in terms of  2 . Where must the foci of an  3 . What special case of the 
its foci. ellipse lie? ellipse do we have when the 

major and minor axis are of 
the same length? 

4 . For the special case  5 . What can be said about the 
mentioned in the previous symmetry of the graph of an 
question, what would be ellipse with center at the 
true about the foci of that origin and foci along the 
ellipse? y-axis? 

Algebraic 

For the following exercises, determine whether the given equations represent ellipses. If yes, write in standard form. 

6 .  7 .  8 . 

9 .  10 . 

For the following exercises, write the equation of an ellipse in standard form, and identify the end points of the major 
and minor axes as well as the foci. 

11 .  12 .  13 . 

14 .  15 .  16 . 

17 .  18 .  19 . 



1130     12 • Analytic Geometry

20 .  21 . 

22 .  23 . 

24 .  25 . 

26 . 

For the following exercises, find the foci for the given ellipses. 

27 .  28 .  29 . 

30 .  31 . 

Graphical 

For the following exercises, graph the given ellipses, noting center, vertices, and foci. 

32 .  33 . 34 . 

35 . 36 .  37 . 

38 .  39 . 40 . 

41 . 42 . 

43 . 44 . 

45 . 

For the following exercises, use the given information about the graph of each ellipse to determine its equation. 
46 . Center at the origin,  47 . Center at the origin,  48 . Center at the origin, 

symmetric with respect to symmetric with respect to symmetric with respect to 
the x- and y-axes, focus at the x- and y-axes, focus at the x- and y-axes, focus at 

 and point on graph  and point on graph  and major axis is 
twice as long as minor axis. 

49 . Center  ; vertex  ;  50 . Center  ; vertex  51 . Center  ; vertex 
one focus:  . ; one focus:  ; one focus: 

For the following exercises, given the graph of the ellipse, determine its equation. 
52 . 53 . 54 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



12.1 • The Ellipse     1131

55 . 56 . 

Extensions 

For the following exercises, find the area of the ellipse. The area of an ellipse is given by the formula 

57 .  58 .  59 . 

60 .  61 . 

Real-World Applications 

62 . Find the equation of the  63 . Find the equation of the  64 . An arch has the shape of a 
ellipse that will just fit ellipse that will just fit semi-ellipse (the top half of 
inside a box that is 8 units inside a box that is four an ellipse). The arch has a 
wide and 4 units high. times as wide as it is high. height of 8 feet and a span 

Express in terms of  the of 20 feet. Find an equation 
height. for the ellipse, and use that 

to find the height to the 
nearest 0.01 foot of the 
arch at a distance of 4 feet 
from the center. 

65 . An arch has the shape of a  66 . A bridge is to be built in  67 . A person in a whispering 
semi-ellipse. The arch has a the shape of a semi- gallery standing at one 
height of 12 feet and a elliptical arch and is to focus of the ellipse can 
span of 40 feet. Find an have a span of 120 feet. whisper and be heard by a 
equation for the ellipse, The height of the arch at a person standing at the 
and use that to find the distance of 40 feet from other focus because all the 
distance from the center to the center is to be 8 feet. sound waves that reach 
a point at which the height Find the height of the arch the ceiling are reflected to 
is 6 feet. Round to the at its center. the other person. If a 
nearest hundredth. whispering gallery has a 

length of 120 feet, and the 
foci are located 30 feet 
from the center, find the 
height of the ceiling at the 
center. 

68 . A person is standing 8 feet 
from the nearest wall in a 
whispering gallery. If that 
person is at one focus, and 
the other focus is 80 feet 
away, what is the length 
and height at the center of 
the gallery? 



1132     12 • Analytic Geometry

12.2 The Hyperbola 
Learning Objectives 
In this section, you will: 

Locate a hyperbola’s vertices and foci. 
Write equations of hyperbolas in standard form. 
Graph hyperbolas centered at the origin. 
Graph hyperbolas not centered at the origin. 
Solve applied problems involving hyperbolas. 

What do paths of comets, supersonic booms, ancient Grecian pillars, and natural draft cooling towers have in common? 
They can all be modeled by the same type of conic. For instance, when something moves faster than the speed of sound, 
a shock wave in the form of a cone is created. A portion of a conic is formed when the wave intersects the ground, 
resulting in a sonic boom. See Figure 1. 

Figure 1 A shock wave intersecting the ground forms a portion of a conic and results in a sonic boom. 
Most people are familiar with the sonic boom created by supersonic aircraft, but humans were breaking the sound 
barrier long before the first supersonic flight. The crack of a whip occurs because the tip is exceeding the speed of 
sound. The bullets shot from many firearms also break the sound barrier, although the bang of the gun usually 
supersedes the sound of the sonic boom. 

Locating the Vertices and Foci of a Hyperbola 
In analytic geometry, a hyperbola is a conic section formed by intersecting a right circular cone with a plane at an angle 
such that both halves of the cone are intersected. This intersection produces two separate unbounded curves that are 
mirror images of each other. See Figure 2. 

Figure 2 A hyperbola 
Like the ellipse, the hyperbola can also be defined as a set of points in the coordinate plane. A hyperbola is the set of all 
points  in a plane such that the difference of the distances between  and the foci is a positive constant. 
Notice that the definition of a hyperbola is very similar to that of an ellipse. The distinction is that the hyperbola is 
defined in terms of the difference of two distances, whereas the ellipse is defined in terms of the sum of two distances. 
As with the ellipse, every hyperbola has two axes of symmetry. The transverse axis is a line segment that passes 
through the center of the hyperbola and has vertices as its endpoints. The foci lie on the line that contains the transverse 
axis. The conjugate axis is perpendicular to the transverse axis and has the co-vertices as its endpoints. The center of a 

Access for free at openstax.org



12.2 • The Hyperbola     1133

hyperbola is the midpoint of both the transverse and conjugate axes, where they intersect. Every hyperbola also has two 
asymptotes that pass through its center. As a hyperbola recedes from the center, its branches approach these 
asymptotes. The central rectangle of the hyperbola is centered at the origin with sides that pass through each vertex 
and co-vertex; it is a useful tool for graphing the hyperbola and its asymptotes. To sketch the asymptotes of the 
hyperbola, simply sketch and extend the diagonals of the central rectangle. See Figure 3. 

Figure 3 Key features of the hyperbola 
In this section, we will limit our discussion to hyperbolas that are positioned vertically or horizontally in the coordinate 
plane; the axes will either lie on or be parallel to the x- and y-axes. We will consider two cases: those that are centered at 
the origin, and those that are centered at a point other than the origin. 

Deriving the Equation of a Hyperbola Centered at the Origin 
Let  and  be the foci of a hyperbola centered at the origin. The hyperbola is the set of all points  such 
that the difference of the distances from  to the foci is constant. See Figure 4. 

Figure 4 
If  is a vertex of the hyperbola, the distance from  to  is  The distance from  to 

 is  The difference of the distances from the foci to the vertex is 

If  is a point on the hyperbola, we can define the following variables: 



1134     12 • Analytic Geometry

By definition of a hyperbola,  is constant for any point  on the hyperbola. We know that the difference of 
these distances is  for the vertex  It follows that  for any point on the hyperbola. As with the 
derivation of the equation of an ellipse, we will begin by applying the distance formula. The rest of the derivation is 
algebraic. Compare this derivation with the one from the previous section for ellipses. 

This equation defines a hyperbola centered at the origin with vertices  and co-vertices 

Standard Forms of the Equation of a Hyperbola with Center (0,0) 

The standard form of the equation of a hyperbola with center  and transverse axis on the x-axis is 

where 

• the length of the transverse axis is 
• the coordinates of the vertices are 
• the length of the conjugate axis is 
• the coordinates of the co-vertices are 
• the distance between the foci is  where 
• the coordinates of the foci are 
• the equations of the asymptotes are 

See Figure 5a. 

The standard form of the equation of a hyperbola with center  and transverse axis on the y-axis is 

where 

Access for free at openstax.org



12.2 • The Hyperbola     1135

• the length of the transverse axis is 
• the coordinates of the vertices are 
• the length of the conjugate axis is 
• the coordinates of the co-vertices are 
• the distance between the foci is  where 
• the coordinates of the foci are 
• the equations of the asymptotes are 

See Figure 5b. 

Note that the vertices, co-vertices, and foci are related by the equation  When we are given the equation 
of a hyperbola, we can use this relationship to identify its vertices and foci. 

Figure 5 (a) Horizontal hyperbola with center  (b) Vertical hyperbola with center 
...

HOW TO 

Given the equation of a hyperbola in standard form, locate its vertices and foci. 

1. Determine whether the transverse axis lies on the x- or y-axis. Notice that  is always under the variable with 
the positive coefficient. So, if you set the other variable equal to zero, you can easily find the intercepts. In the 
case where the hyperbola is centered at the origin, the intercepts coincide with the vertices. 
a. If the equation has the form  then the transverse axis lies on the x-axis. The vertices are 

located at  and the foci are located at 
b. If the equation has the form  then the transverse axis lies on the y-axis. The vertices are 

located at  and the foci are located at 

2. Solve for  using the equation 
3. Solve for  using the equation 



1136     12 • Analytic Geometry

EXAMPLE 1 

Locating a Hyperbola’s Vertices and Foci 
Identify the vertices and foci of the hyperbola with equation 

Solution 
The equation has the form  so the transverse axis lies on the y-axis. The hyperbola is centered at the origin, 
so the vertices serve as the y-intercepts of the graph. To find the vertices, set  and solve for 

The foci are located at  Solving for 

Therefore, the vertices are located at  and the foci are located at 

 TRY IT #1 Identify the vertices and foci of the hyperbola with equation 

Writing Equations of Hyperbolas in Standard Form 
Just as with ellipses, writing the equation for a hyperbola in standard form allows us to calculate the key features: its 
center, vertices, co-vertices, foci, asymptotes, and the lengths and positions of the transverse and conjugate axes. 
Conversely, an equation for a hyperbola can be found given its key features. We begin by finding standard equations for 
hyperbolas centered at the origin. Then we will turn our attention to finding standard equations for hyperbolas centered 
at some point other than the origin. 

Hyperbolas Centered at the Origin 
Reviewing the standard forms given for hyperbolas centered at  we see that the vertices, co-vertices, and foci are 
related by the equation  Note that this equation can also be rewritten as  This relationship is 
used to write the equation for a hyperbola when given the coordinates of its foci and vertices. 

...
HOW TO 

Given the vertices and foci of a hyperbola centered at  write its equation in standard form. 

1. Determine whether the transverse axis lies on the x- or y-axis. 
a. If the given coordinates of the vertices and foci have the form  and  respectively, then the 

transverse axis is the x-axis. Use the standard form 
b. If the given coordinates of the vertices and foci have the form  and  respectively, then the 

transverse axis is the y-axis. Use the standard form 

2. Find  using the equation 
3. Substitute the values for  and  into the standard form of the equation determined in Step 1. 

Access for free at openstax.org



12.2 • The Hyperbola     1137

EXAMPLE 2 

Finding the Equation of a Hyperbola Centered at (0,0) Given its Foci and Vertices 
What is the standard form equation of the hyperbola that has vertices  and foci 

Solution 
The vertices and foci are on the x-axis. Thus, the equation for the hyperbola will have the form 

The vertices are  so  and 

The foci are  so  and 

Solving for  we have 

Finally, we substitute  and  into the standard form of the equation,  The equation of the 

hyperbola is  as shown in Figure 6. 

Figure 6 

 TRY IT #2 What is the standard form equation of the hyperbola that has vertices  and foci 

Hyperbolas Not Centered at the Origin 
Like the graphs for other equations, the graph of a hyperbola can be translated. If a hyperbola is translated  units 
horizontally and  units vertically, the center of the hyperbola will be  This translation results in the standard form 
of the equation we saw previously, with  replaced by  and  replaced by 

Standard Forms of the Equation of a Hyperbola with Center (h, k) 

The standard form of the equation of a hyperbola with center  and transverse axis parallel to the x-axis is 

where 

• the length of the transverse axis is 
• the coordinates of the vertices are 



1138     12 • Analytic Geometry

• the length of the conjugate axis is 
• the coordinates of the co-vertices are 
• the distance between the foci is  where 
• the coordinates of the foci are 

The asymptotes of the hyperbola coincide with the diagonals of the central rectangle. The length of the rectangle is 
 and its width is  The slopes of the diagonals are  and each diagonal passes through the center  Using 

the point-slope formula, it is simple to show that the equations of the asymptotes are  See Figure 
7a 

The standard form of the equation of a hyperbola with center  and transverse axis parallel to the y-axis is 

where 

• the length of the transverse axis is 
• the coordinates of the vertices are 
• the length of the conjugate axis is 
• the coordinates of the co-vertices are 
• the distance between the foci is  where 
• the coordinates of the foci are 

Using the reasoning above, the equations of the asymptotes are  See Figure 7b. 

Figure 7 (a) Horizontal hyperbola with center  (b) Vertical hyperbola with center 
Like hyperbolas centered at the origin, hyperbolas centered at a point  have vertices, co-vertices, and foci that are 
related by the equation  We can use this relationship along with the midpoint and distance formulas to find 
the standard equation of a hyperbola when the vertices and foci are given. 

...
HOW TO 

Given the vertices and foci of a hyperbola centered at  write its equation in standard form. 

1. Determine whether the transverse axis is parallel to the x- or y-axis. 

Access for free at openstax.org



12.2 • The Hyperbola     1139

a. If the y-coordinates of the given vertices and foci are the same, then the transverse axis is parallel to the 
x-axis. Use the standard form 

b. If the x-coordinates of the given vertices and foci are the same, then the transverse axis is parallel to the 
y-axis. Use the standard form 

2. Identify the center of the hyperbola,  using the midpoint formula and the given coordinates for the 
vertices. 

3. Find  by solving for the length of the transverse axis,  , which is the distance between the given vertices. 
4. Find  using  and  found in Step 2 along with the given coordinates for the foci. 
5. Solve for  using the equation 
6. Substitute the values for  and  into the standard form of the equation determined in Step 1. 

EXAMPLE 3 

Finding the Equation of a Hyperbola Centered at (h, k) Given its Foci and Vertices 
What is the standard form equation of the hyperbola that has vertices at  and  and foci at  and 

Solution 
The y-coordinates of the vertices and foci are the same, so the transverse axis is parallel to the x-axis. Thus, the equation 
of the hyperbola will have the form 

First, we identify the center,  The center is halfway between the vertices  and  Applying the midpoint 
formula, we have 

Next, we find  The length of the transverse axis,  is bounded by the vertices. So, we can find  by finding the 
distance between the x-coordinates of the vertices. 

Now we need to find  The coordinates of the foci are  So  and  We 
can use the x-coordinate from either of these points to solve for  Using the point  and substituting 

Next, solve for  using the equation 

Finally, substitute the values found for  and  into the standard form of the equation. 



1140     12 • Analytic Geometry

 TRY IT #3 What is the standard form equation of the hyperbola that has vertices  and  and foci 
 and 

Graphing Hyperbolas Centered at the Origin 
When we have an equation in standard form for a hyperbola centered at the origin, we can interpret its parts to identify 
the key features of its graph: the center, vertices, co-vertices, asymptotes, foci, and lengths and positions of the 
transverse and conjugate axes. To graph hyperbolas centered at the origin, we use the standard form  for 

horizontal hyperbolas and the standard form  for vertical hyperbolas. 

...
HOW TO 

Given a standard form equation for a hyperbola centered at  sketch the graph. 

1. Determine which of the standard forms applies to the given equation. 
2. Use the standard form identified in Step 1 to determine the position of the transverse axis; coordinates for the 

vertices, co-vertices, and foci; and the equations for the asymptotes. 
a. If the equation is in the form  then 

▪ the transverse axis is on the x-axis 
▪ the coordinates of the vertices are 
▪ the coordinates of the co-vertices are 
▪ the coordinates of the foci are 
▪ the equations of the asymptotes are 

b. If the equation is in the form  then 
▪ the transverse axis is on the y-axis 
▪ the coordinates of the vertices are 
▪ the coordinates of the co-vertices are 
▪ the coordinates of the foci are 
▪ the equations of the asymptotes are 

3. Solve for the coordinates of the foci using the equation 
4. Plot the vertices, co-vertices, foci, and asymptotes in the coordinate plane, and draw a smooth curve to form the 

hyperbola. 

EXAMPLE 4 

Graphing a Hyperbola Centered at (0, 0) Given an Equation in Standard Form 
Graph the hyperbola given by the equation  Identify and label the vertices, co-vertices, foci, and 
asymptotes. 

Solution 
The standard form that applies to the given equation is  Thus, the transverse axis is on the y-axis 

The coordinates of the vertices are 

The coordinates of the co-vertices are 

The coordinates of the foci are  where  Solving for  we have 

Access for free at openstax.org



12.2 • The Hyperbola     1141

Therefore, the coordinates of the foci are 

The equations of the asymptotes are 

Plot and label the vertices and co-vertices, and then sketch the central rectangle. Sides of the rectangle are parallel to the 
axes and pass through the vertices and co-vertices. Sketch and extend the diagonals of the central rectangle to show the 
asymptotes. The central rectangle and asymptotes provide the framework needed to sketch an accurate graph of the 
hyperbola. Label the foci and asymptotes, and draw a smooth curve to form the hyperbola, as shown in Figure 8. 

Figure 8 

 TRY IT #4 Graph the hyperbola given by the equation  Identify and label the vertices, co-
vertices, foci, and asymptotes. 

Graphing Hyperbolas Not Centered at the Origin 
Graphing hyperbolas centered at a point  other than the origin is similar to graphing ellipses centered at a point 
other than the origin. We use the standard forms  for horizontal hyperbolas, and 

 for vertical hyperbolas. From these standard form equations we can easily calculate and plot key 
features of the graph: the coordinates of its center, vertices, co-vertices, and foci; the equations of its asymptotes; and 
the positions of the transverse and conjugate axes. 

...
HOW TO 

Given a general form for a hyperbola centered at  sketch the graph. 

1. Convert the general form to that standard form. Determine which of the standard forms applies to the given 
equation. 

2. Use the standard form identified in Step 1 to determine the position of the transverse axis; coordinates for the 
center, vertices, co-vertices, foci; and equations for the asymptotes. 



1142     12 • Analytic Geometry

a. If the equation is in the form  then 
▪ the transverse axis is parallel to the x-axis 
▪ the center is 
▪ the coordinates of the vertices are 
▪ the coordinates of the co-vertices are 
▪ the coordinates of the foci are 
▪ the equations of the asymptotes are 

b. If the equation is in the form  then 
▪ the transverse axis is parallel to the y-axis 
▪ the center is 
▪ the coordinates of the vertices are 
▪ the coordinates of the co-vertices are 
▪ the coordinates of the foci are 
▪ the equations of the asymptotes are 

3. Solve for the coordinates of the foci using the equation 
4. Plot the center, vertices, co-vertices, foci, and asymptotes in the coordinate plane and draw a smooth curve to 

form the hyperbola. 

EXAMPLE 5 

Graphing a Hyperbola Centered at (h, k) Given an Equation in General Form 
Graph the hyperbola given by the equation  Identify and label the center, vertices, co-
vertices, foci, and asymptotes. 

Solution 
Start by expressing the equation in standard form. Group terms that contain the same variable, and move the constant 
to the opposite side of the equation. 

Factor the leading coefficient of each expression. 

Complete the square twice. Remember to balance the equation by adding the same constants to each side. 

Rewrite as perfect squares. 

Divide both sides by the constant term to place the equation in standard form. 

The standard form that applies to the given equation is  where  and  or  and 
 Thus, the transverse axis is parallel to the x-axis. It follows that: 

• the center of the ellipse is 
• the coordinates of the vertices are  or  and 
• the coordinates of the co-vertices are  or  and 
• the coordinates of the foci are  where  Solving for  we have 

Access for free at openstax.org



12.2 • The Hyperbola     1143

Therefore, the coordinates of the foci are  and 

The equations of the asymptotes are 

Next, we plot and label the center, vertices, co-vertices, foci, and asymptotes and draw smooth curves to form the 
hyperbola, as shown in Figure 9. 

Figure 9 

 TRY IT #5 Graph the hyperbola given by the standard form of an equation  Identify and 
label the center, vertices, co-vertices, foci, and asymptotes. 

Solving Applied Problems Involving Hyperbolas 
As we discussed at the beginning of this section, hyperbolas have real-world applications in many fields, such as 
astronomy, physics, engineering, and architecture. The design efficiency of hyperbolic cooling towers is particularly 
interesting. Cooling towers are used to transfer waste heat to the atmosphere and are often touted for their ability to 
generate power efficiently. Because of their hyperbolic form, these structures are able to withstand extreme winds while 
requiring less material than any other forms of their size and strength. See Figure 10. For example, a 500-foot tower can 
be made of a reinforced concrete shell only 6 or 8 inches wide! 

Figure 10 Cooling towers at the Drax power station in North Yorkshire, United Kingdom (credit: Les Haines, Flickr) 
The first hyperbolic towers were designed in 1914 and were 35 meters high. Today, the tallest cooling towers are in 



1144     12 • Analytic Geometry

France, standing a remarkable 170 meters tall. In Example 6 we will use the design layout of a cooling tower to find a 
hyperbolic equation that models its sides. 

EXAMPLE 6 

Solving Applied Problems Involving Hyperbolas 
The design layout of a cooling tower is shown in Figure 11. The tower stands 179.6 meters tall. The diameter of the top is 
72 meters. At their closest, the sides of the tower are 60 meters apart. 

Figure 11 Project design for a natural draft cooling tower 
Find the equation of the hyperbola that models the sides of the cooling tower. Assume that the center of the 
hyperbola—indicated by the intersection of dashed perpendicular lines in the figure—is the origin of the coordinate 
plane. Round final values to four decimal places. 

Solution 
We are assuming the center of the tower is at the origin, so we can use the standard form of a horizontal hyperbola 
centered at the origin:  where the branches of the hyperbola form the sides of the cooling tower. We must 
find the values of  and  to complete the model. 

First, we find  Recall that the length of the transverse axis of a hyperbola is  This length is represented by the 
distance where the sides are closest, which is given as  meters. So,  Therefore,  and 

To solve for  we need to substitute for  and  in our equation using a known point. To do this, we can use the 
dimensions of the tower to find some point  that lies on the hyperbola. We will use the top right corner of the tower 
to represent that point. Since the y-axis bisects the tower, our x-value can be represented by the radius of the top, or 36 
meters. The y-value is represented by the distance from the origin to the top, which is given as 79.6 meters. Therefore, 

The sides of the tower can be modeled by the hyperbolic equation 

Access for free at openstax.org



12.2 • The Hyperbola     1145

 TRY IT #6 A design for a cooling tower project is shown in Figure 12. Find the equation of the hyperbola that 
models the sides of the cooling tower. Assume that the center of the hyperbola—indicated by the 
intersection of dashed perpendicular lines in the figure—is the origin of the coordinate plane. 
Round final values to four decimal places. 

Figure 12 

 MEDIA 

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with hyperbolas. 

Conic Sections: The Hyperbola Part 1 of 2 (https://openstax.org/l/hyperbola1) 
Conic Sections: The Hyperbola Part 2 of 2 (https://openstax.org/l/hyperbola2) 
Graph a Hyperbola with Center at Origin (https://openstax.org/l/hyperbolaorigin) 
Graph a Hyperbola with Center not at Origin (https://openstax.org/l/hbnotorigin) 

 12.2 SECTION EXERCISES 
Verbal 

1 . Define a hyperbola in terms  2 . What can we conclude  3 . What must be true of the 
of its foci. about a hyperbola if its foci of a hyperbola? 

asymptotes intersect at the 
origin? 

4 . If the transverse axis of a  5 . Where must the center of 
hyperbola is vertical, what hyperbola be relative to its 
do we know about the foci? 
graph? 

Algebraic 

For the following exercises, determine whether the following equations represent hyperbolas. If so, write in standard 
form. 

6 .  7 .  8 . 

9 .  10 . 



1146     12 • Analytic Geometry

For the following exercises, write the equation for the hyperbola in standard form if it is not already, and identify the 
vertices and foci, and write equations of asymptotes. 

11 .  12 .  13 . 

14 .  15 .  16 . 

17 .  18 .  19 . 

20 .  21 . 

22 .  23 . 

24 .  25 . 

For the following exercises, find the equations of the asymptotes for each hyperbola. 

26 .  27 .  28 . 

29 .  30 . 

Graphical 

For the following exercises, sketch a graph of the hyperbola, labeling vertices and foci. 

31 .  32 .  33 . 

34 .  35 .  36 . 

37 .  38 .  39 . 

40 .  41 . 

42 .  43 . 

44 . 

For the following exercises, given information about the graph of the hyperbola, find its equation. 
45 . Vertices at  and  46 . Vertices at  and  47 . Vertices at  and 

 and one focus at  and one focus at and one focus at 

48 . Center:  vertex:  49 . Center:  vertex:  50 . Center:  vertex: 
 one focus:  one focus:  one focus: 

Access for free at openstax.org



12.2 • The Hyperbola     1147

For the following exercises, given the graph of the hyperbola, find its equation. 
51 . 52 . 53 . 

54 . 55 . 

Extensions 

For the following exercises, express the equation for the hyperbola as two functions, with  as a function of  Express as 
simply as possible. Use a graphing calculator to sketch the graph of the two functions on the same axes. 

56 .  57 .  58 . 

59 .  60 . 

Real-World Applications 

For the following exercises, a hedge is to be constructed in the shape of a hyperbola near a fountain at the center of the 
yard. Find the equation of the hyperbola and sketch the graph. 
61 . The hedge will follow the  62 . The hedge will follow the  63 . The hedge will follow the 

asymptotes asymptotes asymptotes  and 
 and its  and  and its closest 

closest distance to the its closest distance to the distance to the center 
center fountain is 5 yards. center fountain is 6 yards. fountain is 10 yards. 

64 . The hedge will follow the  65 . The hedge will follow the 
asymptotes  and asymptotes  and 

 and its closest  and its closest 
distance to the center distance to the center 
fountain is 12 yards. fountain is 20 yards. 



1148     12 • Analytic Geometry

For the following exercises, assume an object enters our solar system and we want to graph its path on a coordinate 
system with the sun at the origin and the x-axis as the axis of symmetry for the object's path. Give the equation of the 
flight path of each object using the given information. 
66 . The object enters along a  67 . The object enters along a  68 . The object enters along a 

path approximated by the path approximated by the path approximated by the 
line  and passes line  and passes line  and 
within 1 au (astronomical within 0.5 au of the sun at passes within 1 au of the 
unit) of the sun at its its closest approach, so the sun at its closest approach, 
closest approach, so that sun is one focus of the so the sun is one focus of 
the sun is one focus of the hyperbola. It then departs the hyperbola. It then 
hyperbola. It then departs the solar system along a departs the solar system 
the solar system along a path approximated by the along a path approximated 
path approximated by the line by the line 
line 

69 . The object enters along a  70 . The object enters along a 
path approximated by the path approximated by the 
line  and passes line  and passes 
within 1 au of the sun at its within 1 au of the sun at its 
closest approach, so the closest approach, so the 
sun is one focus of the sun is one focus of the 
hyperbola. It then departs hyperbola. It then departs 
the solar system along a the solar system along a 
path approximated by the path approximated by the 
line line 

12.3 The Parabola 
Learning Objectives 
In this section, you will: 

Graph parabolas with vertices at the origin. 
Write equations of parabolas in standard form. 
Graph parabolas with vertices not at the origin. 
Solve applied problems involving parabolas. 

Figure 1 Katherine Johnson's pioneering mathematical work in the area of parabolic and other orbital calculations 

Access for free at openstax.org



12.3 • The Parabola     1149

played a significant role in the development of U.S space flight. (credit: NASA) 
Katherine Johnson is the pioneering NASA mathematician who was integral to the successful and safe flight and return 
of many human missions as well as satellites. Prior to the work featured in the movie Hidden Figures, she had already 
made major contributions to the space program. She provided trajectory analysis for the Mercury mission, in which Alan 
Shepard became the first American to reach space, and she and engineer Ted Sopinski authored a monumental paper 
regarding placing an object in a precise orbital position and having it return safely to Earth. Many of the orbits she 
determined were made up of parabolas, and her ability to combine different types of math enabled an unprecedented 
level of precision. Johnson said, "You tell me when you want it and where you want it to land, and I'll do it backwards and 
tell you when to take off." 
Johnson's work on parabolic orbits and other complex mathematics resulted in successful orbits, Moon landings, and the 
development of the Space Shuttle program. Applications of parabolas are also critical to other areas of science. Parabolic 
mirrors (or reflectors) are able to capture energy and focus it to a single point. The advantages of this property are 
evidenced by the vast list of parabolic objects we use every day: satellite dishes, suspension bridges, telescopes, 
microphones, spotlights, and car headlights, to name a few. Parabolic reflectors are also used in alternative energy 
devices, such as solar cookers and water heaters, because they are inexpensive to manufacture and need little 
maintenance. In this section we will explore the parabola and its uses, including low-cost, energy-efficient solar designs. 

Graphing Parabolas with Vertices at the Origin 
In The Ellipse, we saw that an ellipse is formed when a plane cuts through a right circular cone. If the plane is parallel to 
the edge of the cone, an unbounded curve is formed. This curve is a parabola. See Figure 2. 

Figure 2 Parabola 
Like the ellipse and hyperbola, the parabola can also be defined by a set of points in the coordinate plane. A parabola is 
the set of all points  in a plane that are the same distance from a fixed line, called the directrix, and a fixed point 
(the focus) not on the directrix. 
In Quadratic Functions (http://openstax.org/books/precalculus-2e/pages/3-3-power-functions-and-polynomial-
functions), we learned about a parabola’s vertex and axis of symmetry. Now we extend the discussion to include other 
key features of the parabola. See Figure 3. Notice that the axis of symmetry passes through the focus and vertex and is 
perpendicular to the directrix. The vertex is the midpoint between the directrix and the focus. 
The line segment that passes through the focus and is parallel to the directrix is called the latus rectum. The endpoints 
of the latus rectum lie on the curve. By definition, the distance  from the focus to any point  on the parabola is equal 
to the distance from  to the directrix. 



1150     12 • Analytic Geometry

Figure 3 Key features of the parabola 
To work with parabolas in the coordinate plane, we consider two cases: those with a vertex at the origin and those with a 
vertex at a point other than the origin. We begin with the former. 

Figure 4 
Let  be a point on the parabola with vertex  focus  and directrix  as shown in Figure 4. The 
distance  from point  to point  on the directrix is the difference of the y-values:  The distance from 
the focus  to the point  is also equal to  and can be expressed using the distance formula. 

Set the two expressions for  equal to each other and solve for  to derive the equation of the parabola. We do this 
because the distance from  to  equals the distance from  to 

We then square both sides of the equation, expand the squared terms, and simplify by combining like terms. 

The equations of parabolas with vertex  are  when the x-axis is the axis of symmetry and  when 
the y-axis is the axis of symmetry. These standard forms are given below, along with their general graphs and key 
features. 

Standard Forms of Parabolas with Vertex (0, 0) 

Table 1 and Figure 5 summarize the standard features of parabolas with a vertex at the origin. 

Access for free at openstax.org



12.3 • The Parabola     1151

Axis of Symmetry Equation Focus Directrix Endpoints of Latus Rectum 

x-axis 

y-axis 

Table 1 

Figure 5 (a) When  and the axis of symmetry is the x-axis, the parabola opens right. (b) When  and the axis 
of symmetry is the x-axis, the parabola opens left. (c) When  and the axis of symmetry is the y-axis, the parabola 
opens up. (d) When  and the axis of symmetry is the y-axis, the parabola opens down. 

The key features of a parabola are its vertex, axis of symmetry, focus, directrix, and latus rectum. See Figure 5. When 
given a standard equation for a parabola centered at the origin, we can easily identify the key features to graph the 
parabola. 
A line is said to be tangent to a curve if it intersects the curve at exactly one point. If we sketch lines tangent to the 
parabola at the endpoints of the latus rectum, these lines intersect on the axis of symmetry, as shown in Figure 6. 



1152     12 • Analytic Geometry

Figure 6 
...

HOW TO 

Given a standard form equation for a parabola centered at (0, 0), sketch the graph. 

1. Determine which of the standard forms applies to the given equation:  or 
2. Use the standard form identified in Step 1 to determine the axis of symmetry, focus, equation of the directrix, 

and endpoints of the latus rectum. 
a. If the equation is in the form  then 

▪ the axis of symmetry is the x-axis, 
▪ set  equal to the coefficient of x in the given equation to solve for  If  the parabola opens right. 

If  the parabola opens left. 
▪ use  to find the coordinates of the focus, 
▪ use  to find the equation of the directrix, 
▪ use  to find the endpoints of the latus rectum,  Alternately, substitute  into the original 

equation. 

b. If the equation is in the form  then 
▪ the axis of symmetry is the y-axis, 
▪ set  equal to the coefficient of y in the given equation to solve for  If  the parabola opens up. If 

 the parabola opens down. 
▪ use  to find the coordinates of the focus, 
▪ use  to find equation of the directrix, 
▪ use  to find the endpoints of the latus rectum, 

3. Plot the focus, directrix, and latus rectum, and draw a smooth curve to form the parabola. 

EXAMPLE 1 

Graphing a Parabola with Vertex (0, 0) and the x-axis as the Axis of Symmetry 
Graph  Identify and label the focus, directrix, and endpoints of the latus rectum. 

Access for free at openstax.org



12.3 • The Parabola     1153

Solution 
The standard form that applies to the given equation is  Thus, the axis of symmetry is the x-axis. It follows that: 

•  so  Since  the parabola opens right 
• the coordinates of the focus are 
• the equation of the directrix is 
• the endpoints of the latus rectum have the same x-coordinate at the focus. To find the endpoints, substitute 

into the original equation: 
Next we plot the focus, directrix, and latus rectum, and draw a smooth curve to form the parabola. Figure 7 

Figure 7 

 TRY IT #1 Graph  Identify and label the focus, directrix, and endpoints of the latus rectum. 

EXAMPLE 2 

Graphing a Parabola with Vertex (0, 0) and the y-axis as the Axis of Symmetry 
Graph  Identify and label the focus, directrix, and endpoints of the latus rectum. 

Solution 
The standard form that applies to the given equation is  Thus, the axis of symmetry is the y-axis. It follows that: 

•  so  Since  the parabola opens down. 
• the coordinates of the focus are 
• the equation of the directrix is 
• the endpoints of the latus rectum can be found by substituting  into the original equation, 

Next we plot the focus, directrix, and latus rectum, and draw a smooth curve to form the parabola. 



1154     12 • Analytic Geometry

Figure 8 

 TRY IT #2 Graph  Identify and label the focus, directrix, and endpoints of the latus rectum. 

Writing Equations of Parabolas in Standard Form 
In the previous examples, we used the standard form equation of a parabola to calculate the locations of its key features. 
We can also use the calculations in reverse to write an equation for a parabola when given its key features. 

...
HOW TO 

Given its focus and directrix, write the equation for a parabola in standard form. 

1. Determine whether the axis of symmetry is the x- or y-axis. 
a. If the given coordinates of the focus have the form  then the axis of symmetry is the x-axis. Use the 

standard form 
b. If the given coordinates of the focus have the form  then the axis of symmetry is the y-axis. Use the 

standard form 

2. Multiply 
3. Substitute the value from Step 2 into the equation determined in Step 1. 

EXAMPLE 3 

Writing the Equation of a Parabola in Standard Form Given its Focus and Directrix 
What is the equation for the parabola with focus  and directrix 

Solution 
The focus has the form  so the equation will have the form 

• Multiplying  we have 
• Substituting for  we have 

Therefore, the equation for the parabola is 

 TRY IT #3 What is the equation for the parabola with focus  and directrix 

Graphing Parabolas with Vertices Not at the Origin 
Like other graphs we’ve worked with, the graph of a parabola can be translated. If a parabola is translated  units 
horizontally and  units vertically, the vertex will be  This translation results in the standard form of the equation 

Access for free at openstax.org



12.3 • The Parabola     1155

we saw previously with  replaced by  and  replaced by 

To graph parabolas with a vertex  other than the origin, we use the standard form  for 
parabolas that have an axis of symmetry parallel to the x-axis, and  for parabolas that have an axis 
of symmetry parallel to the y-axis. These standard forms are given below, along with their general graphs and key 
features. 

Standard Forms of Parabolas with Vertex (h, k) 

Table 2 and Figure 9 summarize the standard features of parabolas with a vertex at a point 

Axis of Symmetry Equation Focus Directrix Endpoints of Latus Rectum 

Table 2 



1156     12 • Analytic Geometry

Figure 9 (a) When  the parabola opens right. (b) When  the parabola opens left. (c) When  the 
parabola opens up. (d) When  the parabola opens down. 

...
HOW TO 

Given a standard form equation for a parabola centered at (h, k), sketch the graph. 

1. Determine which of the standard forms applies to the given equation:  or 

2. Use the standard form identified in Step 1 to determine the vertex, axis of symmetry, focus, equation of the 
directrix, and endpoints of the latus rectum. 
a. If the equation is in the form  then: 

▪ use the given equation to identify  and  for the vertex, 
▪ use the value of  to determine the axis of symmetry, 
▪ set  equal to the coefficient of  in the given equation to solve for  If  the parabola opens 

right. If  the parabola opens left. 

Access for free at openstax.org



12.3 • The Parabola     1157

▪ use  and  to find the coordinates of the focus, 
▪ use  and  to find the equation of the directrix, 
▪ use  and  to find the endpoints of the latus rectum, 

b. If the equation is in the form  then: 
▪ use the given equation to identify  and  for the vertex, 
▪ use the value of  to determine the axis of symmetry, 
▪ set  equal to the coefficient of  in the given equation to solve for  If  the parabola opens 

up. If  the parabola opens down. 
▪ use  and  to find the coordinates of the focus, 
▪ use  and  to find the equation of the directrix, 
▪ use  and  to find the endpoints of the latus rectum, 

3. Plot the vertex, axis of symmetry, focus, directrix, and latus rectum, and draw a smooth curve to form the 
parabola. 

EXAMPLE 4 

Graphing a Parabola with Vertex (h, k) and Axis of Symmetry Parallel to the x-axis 
Graph  Identify and label the vertex, axis of symmetry, focus, directrix, and endpoints of the latus 
rectum. 

Solution 
The standard form that applies to the given equation is  Thus, the axis of symmetry is parallel to 
the x-axis. It follows that: 

• the vertex is 
• the axis of symmetry is 
•  so  Since  the parabola opens left. 
• the coordinates of the focus are 
• the equation of the directrix is 
• the endpoints of the latus rectum are  or  and 

Next we plot the vertex, axis of symmetry, focus, directrix, and latus rectum, and draw a smooth curve to form the 
parabola. See Figure 10. 

Figure 10 



1158     12 • Analytic Geometry

 TRY IT #4 Graph  Identify and label the vertex, axis of symmetry, focus, directrix, and 
endpoints of the latus rectum. 

EXAMPLE 5 

Graphing a Parabola from an Equation Given in General Form 
Graph  Identify and label the vertex, axis of symmetry, focus, directrix, and endpoints of the 
latus rectum. 

Solution 
Start by writing the equation of the parabola in standard form. The standard form that applies to the given equation is 

 Thus, the axis of symmetry is parallel to the y-axis. To express the equation of the parabola in this 
form, we begin by isolating the terms that contain the variable  in order to complete the square. 

It follows that: 
• the vertex is 
• the axis of symmetry is 
• since  and so the parabola opens up 
• the coordinates of the focus are 
• the equation of the directrix is 
• the endpoints of the latus rectum are  or  and 

Next we plot the vertex, axis of symmetry, focus, directrix, and latus rectum, and draw a smooth curve to form the 
parabola. See Figure 11. 

Figure 11 

 TRY IT #5 Graph  Identify and label the vertex, axis of symmetry, focus, directrix, and 
endpoints of the latus rectum. 

Solving Applied Problems Involving Parabolas 
As we mentioned at the beginning of the section, parabolas are used to design many objects we use every day, such as 
telescopes, suspension bridges, microphones, and radar equipment. Parabolic mirrors, such as the one used to light the 
Olympic torch, have a very unique reflecting property. When rays of light parallel to the parabola’s axis of symmetry are 
directed toward any surface of the mirror, the light is reflected directly to the focus. See Figure 12. This is why the 
Olympic torch is ignited when it is held at the focus of the parabolic mirror. 

Access for free at openstax.org



12.3 • The Parabola     1159

Figure 12 Reflecting property of parabolas 
Parabolic mirrors have the ability to focus the sun’s energy to a single point, raising the temperature hundreds of 
degrees in a matter of seconds. Thus, parabolic mirrors are featured in many low-cost, energy efficient solar products, 
such as solar cookers, solar heaters, and even travel-sized fire starters. 

EXAMPLE 6 

Solving Applied Problems Involving Parabolas 
A cross-section of a design for a travel-sized solar fire starter is shown in Figure 13. The sun’s rays reflect off the parabolic 
mirror toward an object attached to the igniter. Because the igniter is located at the focus of the parabola, the reflected 
rays cause the object to burn in just seconds. 

ⓐ  Find the equation of the parabola that models the fire starter. Assume that the vertex of the parabolic mirror is the 
origin of the coordinate plane. 
ⓑ  Use the equation found in part ⓐ to find the depth of the fire starter. 

Figure 13 Cross-section of a travel-sized solar fire starter 

Solution 
ⓐ  The vertex of the dish is the origin of the coordinate plane, so the parabola will take the standard form 
where  The igniter, which is the focus, is 1.7 inches above the vertex of the dish. Thus we have 

ⓑ  The dish extends  inches on either side of the origin. We can substitute 2.25 for  in the equation from 
part (a) to find the depth of the dish. 

The dish is about 0.74 inches deep. 



1160     12 • Analytic Geometry

 TRY IT #6 Balcony-sized solar cookers have been designed for families living in India. The top of a dish has a 
diameter of 1600 mm. The sun’s rays reflect off the parabolic mirror toward the “cooker,” which is 
placed 320 mm from the base. 

ⓐ  Find an equation that models a cross-section of the solar cooker. Assume that the vertex of 
the parabolic mirror is the origin of the coordinate plane, and that the parabola opens to the right 
(i.e., has the x-axis as its axis of symmetry). 

ⓑ  Use the equation found in part ⓐ  to find the depth of the cooker. 

 MEDIA 

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with parabolas. 

Conic Sections: The Parabola Part 1 of 2 (https://openstax.org/l/parabola1) 
Conic Sections: The Parabola Part 2 of 2 (https://openstax.org/l/parabola2) 
Parabola with Vertical Axis (https://openstax.org/l/parabolavertcal) 
Parabola with Horizontal Axis (https://openstax.org/l/parabolahoriz) 

 12.3 SECTION EXERCISES 
Verbal 

1 . Define a parabola in terms  2 . If the equation of a parabola  3 . If the equation of a parabola 
of its focus and directrix. is written in standard form is written in standard form 

and  is positive and the and  is negative and the 
directrix is a vertical line, directrix is a horizontal line, 
then what can we conclude then what can we conclude 
about its graph? about its graph? 

4 . What is the effect on the  5 . As the graph of a parabola 
graph of a parabola if its becomes wider, what will 
equation in standard form happen to the distance 
has increasing values of between the focus and 

directrix? 

Algebraic 

For the following exercises, determine whether the given equation is a parabola. If so, rewrite the equation in standard 
form. 

6 .  7 .  8 . 

9 .  10 . 

For the following exercises, rewrite the given equation in standard form, and then determine the vertex  focus 
and directrix  of the parabola. 

11 .  12 .  13 . 

14 .  15 .  16 . 

17 .  18 .  19 . 

20 .  21 .  22 . 

23 .  24 .  25 . 

26 .  27 .  28 . 

29 .  30 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



12.3 • The Parabola     1161

Graphical 

For the following exercises, graph the parabola, labeling the focus and the directrix. 

31 .  32 .  33 . 

34 .  35 .  36 . 

37 .  38 .  39 . 

40 .  41 .  42 . 

43 .  44 . 

For the following exercises, find the equation of the parabola given information about its graph. 
45 . Vertex is  directrix is  46 . Vertex is  directrix is  47 . Vertex is  directrix is 

 focus is  focus is  focus is 

48 . Vertex is  directrix  49 . Vertex is  50 . Vertex is  directrix is 
is  focus is directrix is  focus  focus is 

is 

For the following exercises, determine the equation for the parabola from its graph. 
51 .  52 .  53 . 

54 .  55 . 

Extensions 

For the following exercises, the vertex and endpoints of the latus rectum of a parabola are given. Find the equation. 
56 . , Endpoints  ,  57 . , Endpoints ,  58 . , Endpoints , 



1162     12 • Analytic Geometry

59 . , Endpoints  60 . , Endpoints 
, , 

Real-World Applications 

61 . The mirror in an  62 . If we want to construct the  63 . A satellite dish is shaped 
automobile headlight has a mirror from the previous like a paraboloid of 
parabolic cross-section exercise such that the revolution. This means that 
with the light bulb at the focus is located at it can be formed by 
focus. On a schematic, the  what should the rotating a parabola around 
equation of the parabola is equation of the parabola its axis of symmetry. The 
given as  At what be? receiver is to be located at 
coordinates should you the focus. If the dish is 12 
place the light bulb? feet across at its opening 

and 4 feet deep at its 
center, where should the 
receiver be placed? 

64 . Consider the satellite dish  65 . The reflector in a  66 . If the reflector in the 
from the previous exercise. searchlight is shaped like a searchlight from the 
If the dish is 8 feet across paraboloid of revolution. A previous exercise has the 
at the opening and 2 feet light source is located 1 light source located 6 
deep, where should we foot from the base along inches from the base along 
place the receiver? the axis of symmetry. If the the axis of symmetry and 

opening of the searchlight the opening is 4 feet, find 
is 3 feet across, find the the depth. 
depth. 

67 . An arch is in the shape of a  68 . If the arch from the  69 . An object is projected so as 
parabola. It has a span of previous exercise has a to follow a parabolic path 
100 feet and a maximum span of 160 feet and a given by 
height of 20 feet. Find the maximum height of 40 where  is the horizontal 
equation of the parabola, feet, find the equation of distance traveled in feet 
and determine the height the parabola, and and  is the height. 
of the arch 40 feet from the determine the distance Determine the maximum 
center. from the center at which height the object reaches. 

the height is 20 feet. 
70 . For the object from the 

previous exercise, assume 
the path followed is given 
by 
Determine how far along 
the horizontal the object 
traveled to reach 
maximum height. 

12.4 Rotation of Axes 
Learning Objectives 
In this section, you will: 

Identify nondegenerate conic sections given their general form equations. 
Use rotation of axes formulas. 
Write equations of rotated conics in standard form. 
Identify conics without rotating axes. 

As we have seen, conic sections are formed when a plane intersects two right circular cones aligned tip to tip and 
extending infinitely far in opposite directions, which we also call a cone. The way in which we slice the cone will 
determine the type of conic section formed at the intersection. A circle is formed by slicing a cone with a plane 
perpendicular to the axis of symmetry of the cone. An ellipse is formed by slicing a single cone with a slanted plane not 

Access for free at openstax.org



12.4 • Rotation of Axes     1163

perpendicular to the axis of symmetry. A parabola is formed by slicing the plane through the top or bottom of the 
double-cone, whereas a hyperbola is formed when the plane slices both the top and bottom of the cone. See Figure 1. 

Figure 1 The nondegenerate conic sections 
Ellipses, circles, hyperbolas, and parabolas are sometimes called the nondegenerate conic sections, in contrast to the 
degenerate conic sections, which are shown in Figure 2. A degenerate conic results when a plane intersects the double 
cone and passes through the apex. Depending on the angle of the plane, three types of degenerate conic sections are 
possible: a point, a line, or two intersecting lines. 



1164     12 • Analytic Geometry

Figure 2 Degenerate conic sections 

Identifying Nondegenerate Conics in General Form 
In previous sections of this chapter, we have focused on the standard form equations for nondegenerate conic sections. 
In this section, we will shift our focus to the general form equation, which can be used for any conic. The general form is 
set equal to zero, and the terms and coefficients are given in a particular order, as shown below. 

where  and  are not all zero. We can use the values of the coefficients to identify which type conic is represented 
by a given equation. 
You may notice that the general form equation has an  term that we have not seen in any of the standard form 
equations. As we will discuss later, the  term rotates the conic whenever  is not equal to zero. 

Conic Sections Example 

ellipse 

circle 

hyperbola 

parabola 

one line 

Table 1 

Access for free at openstax.org



12.4 • Rotation of Axes     1165

Conic Sections Example 

intersecting lines 

parallel lines 

a point 

no graph 

Table 1 

General Form of Conic Sections 

A conic section has the general form 

where  and  are not all zero. 

Table 2 summarizes the different conic sections where  and  and  are nonzero real numbers. This indicates 
that the conic has not been rotated. 

ellipse 

circle 

hyperbola  where  and  are positive 

parabola 

Table 2 

...
HOW TO 

Given the equation of a conic, identify the type of conic. 

1. Rewrite the equation in the general form, 
2. Identify the values of  and  from the general form. 

a. If  and  are nonzero, have the same sign, and are not equal to each other, then the graph may be an 
ellipse. 

b. If  and  are equal and nonzero and have the same sign, then the graph may be a circle. 
c. If  and  are nonzero and have opposite signs, then the graph may be a hyperbola. 
d. If either  or  is zero, then the graph may be a parabola. 

If B = 0, the conic section will have a vertical and/or horizontal axes. If B does not equal 0, as shown below, the 
conic section is rotated. Notice the phrase “may be” in the definitions. That is because the equation may not 
represent a conic section at all, depending on the values of A, B, C, D, E, and F. For example, the degenerate case 
of a circle or an ellipse is a point: 

 when A and B have the same sign. 
The degenerate case of a hyperbola is two intersecting straight lines:  when A and B have 
opposite signs. 
On the other hand, the equation,  when A and B are positive does not represent a graph at 



1166     12 • Analytic Geometry

all, since there are no real ordered pairs which satisfy it. 

EXAMPLE 1 

Identifying a Conic from Its General Form 
Identify the graph of each of the following nondegenerate conic sections. 

ⓐ  ⓑ   ⓒ  
ⓓ  

Solution 

ⓐ  Rewriting the general form, we have 
 and  so we observe that  and  have opposite signs. The graph of this equation is a hyperbola. 

ⓑ  Rewriting the general form, we have 
 and  We can determine that the equation is a parabola, since  is zero. 

ⓒ  Rewriting the general form, we have 
 and  Because  the graph of this equation is a circle. 

ⓓ  Rewriting the general form, we have 
 and  Because  and  the graph of this equation is an ellipse. 

 TRY IT #1 Identify the graph of each of the following nondegenerate conic sections. 

ⓐ   ⓑ  

Finding a New Representation of the Given Equation after Rotating through a Given Angle 
Until now, we have looked at equations of conic sections without an  term, which aligns the graphs with the x- and 
y-axes. When we add an  term, we are rotating the conic about the origin. If the x- and y-axes are rotated through an 
angle, say  then every point on the plane may be thought of as having two representations:  on the Cartesian 
plane with the original x-axis and y-axis, and  on the new plane defined by the new, rotated axes, called the 
x'-axis and y'-axis. See Figure 3. 

Figure 3 The graph of the rotated ellipse 

Access for free at openstax.org



12.4 • Rotation of Axes     1167

We will find the relationships between  and  on the Cartesian plane with  and  on the new rotated plane. See 
Figure 4. 

Figure 4 The Cartesian plane with x- and y-axes and the resulting x′− and y′−axes formed by a rotation by an angle 
The original coordinate x- and y-axes have unit vectors  and  The rotated coordinate axes have unit vectors  and 
The angle  is known as the angle of rotation. See Figure 5. We may write the new unit vectors in terms of the original 
ones. 

Figure 5 Relationship between the old and new coordinate planes. 
Consider a vector  in the new coordinate plane. It may be represented in terms of its coordinate axes. 

Because  we have representations of  and  in terms of the new coordinate system. 



1168     12 • Analytic Geometry

Equations of Rotation 

If a point  on the Cartesian plane is represented on a new coordinate plane where the axes of rotation are 
formed by rotating an angle  from the positive x-axis, then the coordinates of the point with respect to the new axes 
are  We can use the following equations of rotation to define the relationship between  and 

and 

...
HOW TO 

Given the equation of a conic, find a new representation after rotating through an angle. 

1. Find  and  where  and 
2. Substitute the expression for  and  into in the given equation, then simplify. 
3. Write the equations with  and  in standard form. 

EXAMPLE 2 

Finding a New Representation of an Equation after Rotating through a Given Angle 
Find a new representation of the equation  after rotating through an angle of 

Solution 
Find  and  where  and 
Because 

and 

Substitute  and  into 

Simplify. 

Access for free at openstax.org



12.4 • Rotation of Axes     1169

Write the equations with  and  in the standard form. 

This equation is an ellipse. Figure 6 shows the graph. 

Figure 6 

Writing Equations of Rotated Conics in Standard Form 
Now that we can find the standard form of a conic when we are given an angle of rotation, we will learn how to 
transform the equation of a conic given in the form  into standard form by 
rotating the axes. To do so, we will rewrite the general form as an equation in the  and  coordinate system without 
the  term, by rotating the axes by a measure of  that satisfies 

We have learned already that any conic may be represented by the second degree equation 

where  and  are not all zero. However, if  then we have an  term that prevents us from rewriting the 
equation in standard form. To eliminate it, we can rotate the axes by an acute angle  where 

• If  then  is in the first quadrant, and  is between 
• If  then  is in the second quadrant, and  is between 
• If  then 



1170     12 • Analytic Geometry

...
HOW TO 

Given an equation for a conic in the  system, rewrite the equation without the  term in terms of  and 
 where the  and  axes are rotations of the standard axes by  degrees. 

1. Find 
2. Find  and 
3. Substitute  and  into  and 
4. Substitute the expression for  and  into in the given equation, and then simplify. 
5. Write the equations with  and  in the standard form with respect to the rotated axes. 

EXAMPLE 3 

Rewriting an Equation with respect to the x′ and y′ axes without the x′y′ Term 
Rewrite the equation  in the  system without an  term. 

Solution 
First, we find  See Figure 7. 

Figure 7 

So the hypotenuse is 

Next, we find  and 

Access for free at openstax.org



12.4 • Rotation of Axes     1171

Substitute the values of  and  into  and 

and 

Substitute the expressions for  and  into in the given equation, and then simplify. 

Write the equations with  and  in the standard form with respect to the new coordinate system. 

Figure 8 shows the graph of the ellipse. 

Figure 8 



1172     12 • Analytic Geometry

 TRY IT #2 Rewrite the  in the  system without the  term. 

EXAMPLE 4 

Graphing an Equation That Has No x′y′ Terms 
Graph the following equation relative to the  system: 

Solution 
First, we find 

Because  we can draw a reference triangle as in Figure 9. 

Figure 9 

Thus, the hypotenuse is 

Next, we find  and  We will use half-angle identities. 

Access for free at openstax.org



12.4 • Rotation of Axes     1173

Now we find  and  

and 

Now we substitute  and  into 

Figure 10 shows the graph of the hyperbola 

Figure 10 



1174     12 • Analytic Geometry

Identifying Conics without Rotating Axes 
Now we have come full circle. How do we identify the type of conic described by an equation? What happens when the 
axes are rotated? Recall, the general form of a conic is 

If we apply the rotation formulas to this equation we get the form 

It may be shown that  The expression does not vary after rotation, so we call the expression 
invariant. The discriminant,  is invariant and remains unchanged after rotation. Because the discriminant 
remains unchanged, observing the discriminant enables us to identify the conic section. 

Using the Discriminant to Identify a Conic 

If the equation  is transformed by rotating axes into the equation 
 then 

The equation  is an ellipse, a parabola, or a hyperbola, or a degenerate case of 
one of these. 

If the discriminant,  is 

•  the conic section is an ellipse 
•  the conic section is a parabola 
•  the conic section is a hyperbola 

EXAMPLE 5 

Identifying the Conic without Rotating Axes 
Identify the conic for each of the following without rotating axes. 

ⓐ   ⓑ  
Solution 

ⓐ  Let’s begin by determining  and 

Now, we find the discriminant. 

Therefore,  represents an ellipse. 

ⓑ  Again, let’s begin by determining  and 

Now, we find the discriminant. 

Access for free at openstax.org



12.4 • Rotation of Axes     1175

Therefore,  represents an ellipse. 

 TRY IT #3 Identify the conic for each of the following without rotating axes. 

ⓐ   ⓑ  

 MEDIA 

Access this online resource for additional instruction and practice with conic sections and rotation of axes. 

Introduction to Conic Sections (https://openstax.org/l/introconic) 

 12.4 SECTION EXERCISES 
Verbal 

1 . What effect does the  term have on the graph of  2 . If the equation of a conic section is written in the 
a conic section? form  and 

what can we conclude? 

3 . If the equation of a conic section is written in the  4 . Given the equation  what 
form  and can we conclude if 

 what can we conclude? 
5 . For the equation 

 the value 
of  that satisfies  gives us what 
information? 

Algebraic 

For the following exercises, determine which conic section is represented based on the given equation. 

6 .  7 .  8 . 

9 .  10 .  11 . 

12 .  13 . 

14 .  15 . 

16 .  17 . 

For the following exercises, find a new representation of the given equation after rotating through the given angle. 

18 .  19.  20 . 

21 .  22 . 

For the following exercises, determine the angle  that will eliminate the  term and write the corresponding equation 
without the  term. 

23 .  24. 



1176     12 • Analytic Geometry

25 .  26 . 

27 .  28 . 

29 .  30 . 

Graphical 

For the following exercises, rotate through the given angle based on the given equation. Give the new equation and 
graph the original and rotated equation. 

31 .  32 .  33 . 

34 .  35 .  36 . 

37 .  38 . 

For the following exercises, graph the equation relative to the  system in which the equation has no  term. 

39 .  40 .  41 . 

42 .  43 .  44 . 

45 .  46 . 

47 .  48 . 

49 . 

For the following exercises, determine the angle of rotation in order to eliminate the  term. Then graph the new set of 
axes. 

50 .  51 . 

52 .  53 . 

54 .  55 . 

For the following exercises, determine the value of  based on the given equation. 

56 . Given  57 . Given 
find  for the graph to be a parabola. find  for the graph to be an ellipse. 

58 . Given  59 . Given 
find  for the graph to be a hyperbola. find  for the graph to be a parabola. 

60 . Given 
find  for the graph to be an ellipse. 

12.5 Conic Sections in Polar Coordinates 
Learning Objectives 
In this section, you will: 

Identify a conic in polar form. 
Graph the polar equations of conics. 
Define conics in terms of a focus and a directrix. 

Access for free at openstax.org



12.5 • Conic Sections in Polar Coordinates     1177

Figure 1 Planets orbiting the sun follow elliptical paths. (credit: NASA Blueshift, Flickr) 
Most of us are familiar with orbital motion, such as the motion of a planet around the sun or an electron around an 
atomic nucleus. Within the planetary system, orbits of planets, asteroids, and comets around a larger celestial body are 
often elliptical. Comets, however, may take on a parabolic or hyperbolic orbit instead. And, in reality, the characteristics 
of the planets’ orbits may vary over time. Each orbit is tied to the location of the celestial body being orbited and the 
distance and direction of the planet or other object from that body. As a result, we tend to use polar coordinates to 
represent these orbits. 
In an elliptical orbit, the periapsis is the point at which the two objects are closest, and the apoapsis is the point at which 
they are farthest apart. Generally, the velocity of the orbiting body tends to increase as it approaches the periapsis and 
decrease as it approaches the apoapsis. Some objects reach an escape velocity, which results in an infinite orbit. These 
bodies exhibit either a parabolic or a hyperbolic orbit about a body; the orbiting body breaks free of the celestial body’s 
gravitational pull and fires off into space. Each of these orbits can be modeled by a conic section in the polar coordinate 
system. 

Identifying a Conic in Polar Form 
Any conic may be determined by three characteristics: a single focus, a fixed line called the directrix, and the ratio of the 
distances of each to a point on the graph. Consider the parabola  shown in Figure 2. 

Figure 2 
In The Parabola, we learned how a parabola is defined by the focus (a fixed point) and the directrix (a fixed line). In this 
section, we will learn how to define any conic in the polar coordinate system in terms of a fixed point, the focus  at 
the pole, and a line, the directrix, which is perpendicular to the polar axis. 
If  is a fixed point, the focus, and  is a fixed line, the directrix, then we can let  be a fixed positive number, called the 
eccentricity, which we can define as the ratio of the distances from a point on the graph to the focus and the point on 
the graph to the directrix. Then the set of all points  such that  is a conic. In other words, we can define a conic 
as the set of all points  with the property that the ratio of the distance from  to  to the distance from  to  is equal 
to the constant 
For a conic with eccentricity 



1178     12 • Analytic Geometry

• if  the conic is an ellipse 
• if  the conic is a parabola 
• if  the conic is an hyperbola 

With this definition, we may now define a conic in terms of the directrix,  the eccentricity  and the angle  Thus, 
each conic may be written as a polar equation, an equation written in terms of  and 

The Polar Equation for a Conic 

For a conic with a focus at the origin, if the directrix is  where  is a positive real number, and the eccentricity 
is a positive real number  the conic has a polar equation 

For a conic with a focus at the origin, if the directrix is  where  is a positive real number, and the eccentricity is 
a positive real number  the conic has a polar equation 

...
HOW TO 

Given the polar equation for a conic, identify the type of conic, the directrix, and the eccentricity. 

1. Multiply the numerator and denominator by the reciprocal of the constant in the denominator to rewrite the 
equation in standard form. 

2. Identify the eccentricity  as the coefficient of the trigonometric function in the denominator. 
3. Compare  with 1 to determine the shape of the conic. 
4. Determine the directrix as  if cosine is in the denominator and  if sine is in the denominator. Set 

equal to the numerator in standard form to solve for  or 

EXAMPLE 1 

Identifying a Conic Given the Polar Form 
For each of the following equations, identify the conic with focus at the origin, the directrix, and the eccentricity. 

a. 
b. 
c. 

Solution 
For each of the three conics, we will rewrite the equation in standard form. Standard form has a 1 as the constant in the 
denominator. Therefore, in all three parts, the first step will be to multiply the numerator and denominator by the 
reciprocal of the constant of the original equation,  where  is that constant. 

a. Multiply the numerator and denominator by 

Because  is in the denominator, the directrix is  Comparing to standard form, note that  Therefore, 
from the numerator, 

Access for free at openstax.org



12.5 • Conic Sections in Polar Coordinates     1179

Since  the conic is an ellipse. The eccentricity is  and the directrix is 

b. Multiply the numerator and denominator by 

Because  is in the denominator, the directrix is  Comparing to standard form,  Therefore, from 
the numerator, 

Since  the conic is a hyperbola. The eccentricity is  and the directrix is 

c. Multiply the numerator and denominator by 

Because sine is in the denominator, the directrix is  Comparing to standard form,  Therefore, from the 
numerator, 

Because  the conic is a parabola. The eccentricity is  and the directrix is 

 TRY IT #1 Identify the conic with focus at the origin, the directrix, and the eccentricity for 

Graphing the Polar Equations of Conics 
When graphing in Cartesian coordinates, each conic section has a unique equation. This is not the case when graphing in 



1180     12 • Analytic Geometry

polar coordinates. We must use the eccentricity of a conic section to determine which type of curve to graph, and then 
determine its specific characteristics. The first step is to rewrite the conic in standard form as we have done in the 
previous example. In other words, we need to rewrite the equation so that the denominator begins with 1. This enables 
us to determine  and, therefore, the shape of the curve. The next step is to substitute values for  and solve for  to plot 
a few key points. Setting  equal to  and  provides the vertices so we can create a rough sketch of the graph. 

EXAMPLE 2 

Graphing a Parabola in Polar Form 
Graph 

Solution 
First, we rewrite the conic in standard form by multiplying the numerator and denominator by the reciprocal of 3, which 
is 

Because  we will graph a parabola with a focus at the origin. The function has a  and there is an addition 
sign in the denominator, so the directrix is 

The directrix is 

Plotting a few key points as in Table 1 will enable us to see the vertices. See Figure 3. 

A B C D 

undefined 

Table 1 

Access for free at openstax.org



12.5 • Conic Sections in Polar Coordinates     1181

Figure 3 

Analysis 
We can check our result with a graphing utility. See Figure 4. 

Figure 4 

EXAMPLE 3 

Graphing a Hyperbola in Polar Form 
Graph 

Solution 
First, we rewrite the conic in standard form by multiplying the numerator and denominator by the reciprocal of 2, which 
is 

Because  so we will graph a hyperbola with a focus at the origin. The function has a  term and there is 



1182     12 • Analytic Geometry

a subtraction sign in the denominator, so the directrix is 

The directrix is 

Plotting a few key points as in Table 2 will enable us to see the vertices. See Figure 5. 

A B C D 

Table 2 

Figure 5 

EXAMPLE 4 

Graphing an Ellipse in Polar Form 
Graph 

Solution 
First, we rewrite the conic in standard form by multiplying the numerator and denominator by the reciprocal of 5, which 
is 

Access for free at openstax.org



12.5 • Conic Sections in Polar Coordinates     1183

Because  so we will graph an ellipse with a focus at the origin. The function has a  and there is a 
subtraction sign in the denominator, so the directrix is 

The directrix is 

Plotting a few key points as in Table 3 will enable us to see the vertices. See Figure 6. 

A B C D 

Table 3 

Figure 6 

Analysis 
We can check our result using a graphing utility. See Figure 7. 



1184     12 • Analytic Geometry

Figure 7  graphed on a viewing window of  by  and 

 TRY IT #2 Graph 

Defining Conics in Terms of a Focus and a Directrix 
So far we have been using polar equations of conics to describe and graph the curve. Now we will work in reverse; we 
will use information about the origin, eccentricity, and directrix to determine the polar equation. 

...
HOW TO 

Given the focus, eccentricity, and directrix of a conic, determine the polar equation. 

1. Determine whether the directrix is horizontal or vertical. If the directrix is given in terms of  we use the general 
polar form in terms of sine. If the directrix is given in terms of  we use the general polar form in terms of 
cosine. 

2. Determine the sign in the denominator. If  use subtraction. If  use addition. 
3. Write the coefficient of the trigonometric function as the given eccentricity. 
4. Write the absolute value of  in the numerator, and simplify the equation. 

EXAMPLE 5 

Finding the Polar Form of a Vertical Conic Given a Focus at the Origin and the Eccentricity and Directrix 
Find the polar form of the conic given a focus at the origin,  and directrix 

Solution 
The directrix is  so we know the trigonometric function in the denominator is sine. 
Because  so we know there is a subtraction sign in the denominator. We use the standard form of 

and  and 
Therefore, 

Access for free at openstax.org



12.5 • Conic Sections in Polar Coordinates     1185

EXAMPLE 6 

Finding the Polar Form of a Horizontal Conic Given a Focus at the Origin and the Eccentricity and Directrix 
Find the polar form of a conic given a focus at the origin,  and directrix 

Solution 
Because the directrix is  we know the function in the denominator is cosine. Because  so we know 
there is an addition sign in the denominator. We use the standard form of 

and  and 

Therefore, 

 TRY IT #3 Find the polar form of the conic given a focus at the origin,  and directrix 

EXAMPLE 7 

Converting a Conic in Polar Form to Rectangular Form 
Convert the conic  to rectangular form. 

Solution 
We will rearrange the formula to use the identities 



1186     12 • Analytic Geometry

 TRY IT #4 Convert the conic  to rectangular form. 

 MEDIA 

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with conics in polar coordinates. 

Polar Equations of Conic Sections (https://openstax.org/l/determineconic) 
Graphing Polar Equations of Conics - 1 (https://openstax.org/l/graphconic1) 
Graphing Polar Equations of Conics - 2 (https://openstax.org/l/graphconic2) 

 12.5 SECTION EXERCISES 
Verbal 

1 . Explain how eccentricity  2 . If a conic section is written  3 . If a conic section is written 
determines which conic as a polar equation, what as a polar equation, and the 
section is given. must be true of the denominator involves 

denominator? what conclusion can be 
drawn about the directrix? 

4 . If the directrix of a conic  5 . What do we know about the 
section is perpendicular to focus/foci of a conic section 
the polar axis, what do we if it is written as a polar 
know about the equation of equation? 
the graph? 

Algebraic 

For the following exercises, identify the conic with a focus at the origin, and then give the directrix and eccentricity. 

6 .  7 .  8 . 

9 .  10 .  11 . 

12 .  13 .  14 . 

15 .  16 .  17 . 

For the following exercises, convert the polar equation of a conic section to a rectangular equation. 

18 .  19 .  20 . 

21 .  22 .  23 . 

24 .  25 .  26 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



12.5 • Conic Sections in Polar Coordinates     1187

27 .  28 .  29 . 

30 . 

For the following exercises, graph the given conic section. If it is a parabola, label the vertex, focus, and directrix. If it is 
an ellipse, label the vertices and foci. If it is a hyperbola, label the vertices and foci. 

31 .  32 .  33 . 

34 .  35 .  36 . 

37 . 38 .  39 . 

40 .  41 .  42 . 

For the following exercises, find the polar equation of the conic with focus at the origin and the given eccentricity and 
directrix. 

43 . Directrix:  44 . Directrix:  45 . Directrix: 

46 . Directrix:  47 . Directrix:  48 . Directrix: 

49 . Directrix:  50 . Directrix:  51 . Directrix: 

52 . Directrix:  53 . Directrix:  54 . Directrix: 

55 . Directrix: 

Extensions 

Recall from Rotation of Axes that equations of conics with an  term have rotated graphs. For the following exercises, 
express each equation in polar form with  as a function of 

56 .  57 .  58 . 

59 .  60 . 



1188     12 • Chapter Review

Chapter Review 
Key Terms 
angle of rotation  an acute angle formed by a set of axes rotated from the Cartesian plane where, if  then 

 is between  if  then  is between  and if  then 
center of a hyperbola the midpoint of both the transverse and conjugate axes of a hyperbola 
center of an ellipse  the midpoint of both the major and minor axes 
conic section  any shape resulting from the intersection of a right circular cone with a plane 
conjugate axis the axis of a hyperbola that is perpendicular to the transverse axis and has the co-vertices as its 

endpoints 
degenerate conic sections  any of the possible shapes formed when a plane intersects a double cone through the 

apex. Types of degenerate conic sections include a point, a line, and intersecting lines. 
directrix a line perpendicular to the axis of symmetry of a parabola; a line such that the ratio of the distance between 

the points on the conic and the focus to the distance to the directrix is constant 
eccentricity  the ratio of the distances from a point  on the graph to the focus  and to the directrix  represented by 

 where  is a positive real number 
ellipse  the set of all points  in a plane such that the sum of their distances from two fixed points is a constant 
foci  plural of focus 
focus (of a parabola)  a fixed point in the interior of a parabola that lies on the axis of symmetry 
focus (of an ellipse)  one of the two fixed points on the major axis of an ellipse such that the sum of the distances from 

these points to any point  on the ellipse is a constant 
hyperbola  the set of all points  in a plane such that the difference of the distances between  and the foci is a 

positive constant 
latus rectum  the line segment that passes through the focus of a parabola parallel to the directrix, with endpoints on 

the parabola 
major axis  the longer of the two axes of an ellipse 
minor axis  the shorter of the two axes of an ellipse 
nondegenerate conic section  a shape formed by the intersection of a plane with a double right cone such that the 

plane does not pass through the apex; nondegenerate conics include circles, ellipses, hyperbolas, and parabolas 
parabola the set of all points  in a plane that are the same distance from a fixed line, called the directrix, and a 

fixed point (the focus) not on the directrix 
polar equation  an equation of a curve in polar coordinates  and 
transverse axis  the axis of a hyperbola that includes the foci and has the vertices as its endpoints 

Key Equations 

Horizontal ellipse, center at origin 

Vertical ellipse, center at origin 

Horizontal ellipse, center 

Vertical ellipse, center 

Hyperbola, center at origin, transverse axis on x-axis 

Hyperbola, center at origin, transverse axis on y-axis 

Access for free at openstax.org



12 • Chapter Review     1189

Hyperbola, center at  transverse axis parallel to x-axis 

Hyperbola, center at  transverse axis parallel to y-axis 

Parabola, vertex at origin, axis of symmetry on x-axis 

Parabola, vertex at origin, axis of symmetry on y-axis 

Parabola, vertex at  axis of symmetry on x-axis 

Parabola, vertex at  axis of symmetry on y-axis 

General Form equation of a conic section 

Rotation of a conic section 

Angle of rotation 

Key Concepts 
12.1 The Ellipse 

• An ellipse is the set of all points  in a plane such that the sum of their distances from two fixed points is a 
constant. Each fixed point is called a focus (plural: foci). 

• When given the coordinates of the foci and vertices of an ellipse, we can write the equation of the ellipse in standard 
form. See Example 1 and Example 2. 

• When given an equation for an ellipse centered at the origin in standard form, we can identify its vertices, co-
vertices, foci, and the lengths and positions of the major and minor axes in order to graph the ellipse. See Example 3 
and Example 4. 

• When given the equation for an ellipse centered at some point other than the origin, we can identify its key features 
and graph the ellipse. See Example 5 and Example 6. 

• Real-world situations can be modeled using the standard equations of ellipses and then evaluated to find key 
features, such as lengths of axes and distance between foci. See Example 7. 

12.2 The Hyperbola 
• A hyperbola is the set of all points  in a plane such that the difference of the distances between  and the 

foci is a positive constant. 
• The standard form of a hyperbola can be used to locate its vertices and foci. See Example 1. 
• When given the coordinates of the foci and vertices of a hyperbola, we can write the equation of the hyperbola in 

standard form. See Example 2 and Example 3. 
• When given an equation for a hyperbola, we can identify its vertices, co-vertices, foci, asymptotes, and lengths and 

positions of the transverse and conjugate axes in order to graph the hyperbola. See Example 4 and Example 5. 
• Real-world situations can be modeled using the standard equations of hyperbolas. For instance, given the 

dimensions of a natural draft cooling tower, we can find a hyperbolic equation that models its sides. See Example 6. 

12.3 The Parabola 
• A parabola is the set of all points  in a plane that are the same distance from a fixed line, called the directrix, 

and a fixed point (the focus) not on the directrix. 
• The standard form of a parabola with vertex  and the x-axis as its axis of symmetry can be used to graph the 

parabola. If  the parabola opens right. If  the parabola opens left. See Example 1. 
• The standard form of a parabola with vertex  and the y-axis as its axis of symmetry can be used to graph the 



1190     12 • Exercises

parabola. If  the parabola opens up. If  the parabola opens down. See Example 2. 
• When given the focus and directrix of a parabola, we can write its equation in standard form. See Example 3. 
• The standard form of a parabola with vertex  and axis of symmetry parallel to the x-axis can be used to graph 

the parabola. If  the parabola opens right. If  the parabola opens left. See Example 4. 
• The standard form of a parabola with vertex  and axis of symmetry parallel to the y-axis can be used to graph 

the parabola. If  the parabola opens up. If  the parabola opens down. See Example 5. 
• Real-world situations can be modeled using the standard equations of parabolas. For instance, given the diameter 

and focus of a cross-section of a parabolic reflector, we can find an equation that models its sides. See Example 6. 

12.4 Rotation of Axes 
• Four basic shapes can result from the intersection of a plane with a pair of right circular cones connected tail to tail. 

They include an ellipse, a circle, a hyperbola, and a parabola. 
• A nondegenerate conic section has the general form  where  and  are 

not all zero. The values of  and  determine the type of conic. See Example 1. 
• Equations of conic sections with an  term have been rotated about the origin. See Example 2. 
• The general form can be transformed into an equation in the  and  coordinate system without the  term. 

See Example 3 and Example 4. 
• An expression is described as invariant if it remains unchanged after rotating. Because the discriminant is invariant, 

observing it enables us to identify the conic section. See Example 5. 

12.5 Conic Sections in Polar Coordinates 
• Any conic may be determined by a single focus, the corresponding eccentricity, and the directrix. We can also define 

a conic in terms of a fixed point, the focus  at the pole, and a line, the directrix, which is perpendicular to the 
polar axis. 

• A conic is the set of all points  where eccentricity  is a positive real number. Each conic may be written in 
terms of its polar equation. See Example 1. 

• The polar equations of conics can be graphed. See Example 2, Example 3, and Example 4. 
• Conics can be defined in terms of a focus, a directrix, and eccentricity. See Example 5 and Example 6. 
• We can use the identities  and  to convert the equation for a conic from 

polar to rectangular form. See Example 7. 

Exercises 
Review Exercises 
The Ellipse 
For the following exercises, write the equation of the ellipse in standard form. Then identify the center, vertices, and foci. 

1 .  2 .  3 . 

4 . 

For the following exercises, graph the ellipse, noting center, vertices, and foci. 

5 .  6 .  7 . 

8 . 

For the following exercises, use the given information to find the equation for the ellipse. 
9 . Center at  focus at  10 . Center at  vertex at  11 . A whispering gallery is to 

 vertex at  focus at be constructed such that 
the foci are located 35 feet 
from the center. If the 
length of the gallery is to 
be 100 feet, what should 
the height of the ceiling 
be? 

Access for free at openstax.org



12 • Exercises     1191

The Hyperbola 

For the following exercises, write the equation of the hyperbola in standard form. Then give the center, vertices, and foci. 

12 .  13 .  14 . 

15 . 

For the following exercises, graph the hyperbola, labeling vertices and foci. 

16 .  17 . 18 . 

19 . 

For the following exercises, find the equation of the hyperbola. 
20 . Center at  vertex at  21 . Foci at  and 

 focus at vertex at 

The Parabola 

For the following exercises, write the equation of the parabola in standard form. Then give the vertex, focus, and 
directrix. 

22 .  23 .  24 . 

25 . 

For the following exercises, graph the parabola, labeling vertex, focus, and directrix. 

26 .  27 . 28 . 

29 . 

For the following exercises, write the equation of the parabola using the given information. 

30 . Focus at  directrix  31 . Focus at  directrix  32 . A cable TV receiving dish is 
is is the shape of a paraboloid 

of revolution. Find the 
location of the receiver, 
which is placed at the 
focus, if the dish is 5 feet 
across at its opening and 
1.5 feet deep. 

Rotation of Axes 

For the following exercises, determine which of the conic sections is represented. 

33 .  34 . 

35 . 

For the following exercises, determine the angle  that will eliminate the  term, and write the corresponding equation 
without the  term. 

36 .  37 . 

For the following exercises, graph the equation relative to the  system in which the equation has no  term. 

38 .  39 . 

40 . 



1192     12 • Exercises

Conic Sections in Polar Coordinates 

For the following exercises, given the polar equation of the conic with focus at the origin, identify the eccentricity and 
directrix. 

41 .  42 .  43 . 

44 . 

For the following exercises, graph the conic given in polar form. If it is a parabola, label the vertex, focus, and directrix. If 
it is an ellipse or a hyperbola, label the vertices and foci. 

45 . 46 .  47 . 

48 . 

For the following exercises, given information about the graph of a conic with focus at the origin, find the equation in 
polar form. 
49 . Directrix is  and  50 . Directrix is  and 

eccentricity eccentricity 

Practice Test 
For the following exercises, write the equation in standard form and state the center, vertices, and foci. 

1 .  2 . 

For the following exercises, sketch the graph, identifying the center, vertices, and foci. 

3 . 4 .  5 . Write the standard form 
equation of an ellipse with a 
center at  vertex at 

 and focus at 
6 . A whispering gallery is to be 

constructed with a length of 
150 feet. If the foci are to be 
located 20 feet away from 
the wall, how high should 
the ceiling be? 

For the following exercises, write the equation of the hyperbola in standard form, and give the center, vertices, foci, and 
asymptotes. 

7 .  8 . 

For the following exercises, graph the hyperbola, noting its center, vertices, and foci. State the equations of the 
asymptotes. 

9 .  10 .  11 . Write the standard form 
equation of a hyperbola 
with foci at  and 

 and a vertex at 

For the following exercises, write the equation of the parabola in standard form, and give the vertex, focus, and equation 
of the directrix. 

12 .  13 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



12 • Exercises     1193

For the following exercises, graph the parabola, labeling the vertex, focus, and directrix. 

14 .  15 . 16 . Write the equation of a 
parabola with a focus at 

 and directrix 
17 . A searchlight is shaped like 

a paraboloid of revolution. 
If the light source is 
located 1.5 feet from the 
base along the axis of 
symmetry, and the depth 
of the searchlight is 3 feet, 
what should the width of 
the opening be? 

For the following exercises, determine which conic section is represented by the given equation, and then determine the 
angle  that will eliminate the  term. 

18 .  19 . 

For the following exercises, rewrite in the  system without the  term, and graph the rotated graph. 

20 .  21 . 

For the following exercises, identify the conic with focus at the origin, and then give the directrix and eccentricity. 

22 .  23 . 

For the following exercises, graph the given conic section. If it is a parabola, label vertex, focus, and directrix. If it is an 
ellipse or a hyperbola, label vertices and foci. 

24 .  25 . 26 . Find a polar equation of 
the conic with focus at the 
origin, eccentricity of 

 and directrix: 



1194     12 • Exercises

Access for free at openstax.org



13 • Introduction to Sequences, Probability and Counting Theory          1195

13 SEQUENCES, PROBABILITY, AND 
COUNTING THEORY 

(credit: Robert Couse-Baker, Flickr.) 

Chapter Outline 
13.1 Sequences and Their Notations 
13.2 Arithmetic Sequences 
13.3 Geometric Sequences 
13.4 Series and Their Notations 
13.5 Counting Principles 
13.6 Binomial Theorem 
13.7 Probability 

Introduction to Sequences, Probability and Counting Theory 
A lottery winner has some big decisions to make regarding what to do with the winnings. Buy a new home? A luxury 
convertible? A cruise around the world? 
The likelihood of winning the lottery is slim, but we all love to fantasize about what we could buy with the winnings. One 
of the first things a lottery winner has to decide is whether to take the winnings in the form of a lump sum or as a series 
of regular payments, called an annuity, over an extended period of time. 
This decision is often based on many factors, such as tax implications, interest rates, and investment strategies. There 
are also personal reasons to consider when making the choice, and one can make many arguments for either decision. 
However, most lottery winners opt for the lump sum. 
In this chapter, we will explore the mathematics behind situations such as these. We will take an in-depth look at 
annuities. We will also look at the branch of mathematics that would allow us to calculate the number of ways to choose 
lottery numbers and the probability of winning. 

13.1 Sequences and Their Notations 
Learning Objectives 
In this section, you will: 

Write the terms of a sequence defined by an explicit formula. 
Write the terms of a sequence defined by a recursive formula. 
Use factorial notation. 

A video game company launches an exciting new advertising campaign. They predict the number of online visits to their 
website, or hits, will double each day. The model they are using shows 2 hits the first day, 4 hits the second day, 8 hits the 
third day, and so on. See Table 1. 



1196     13 • Sequences, Probability, and Counting Theory

Day 1 2 3 4 5 … 

Hits 2 4 8 16 32 … 

Table 1 

If their model continues, how many hits will there be at the end of the month? To answer this question, we’ll first need to 
know how to determine a list of numbers written in a specific order. In this section, we will explore these kinds of ordered 
lists. 

Writing the Terms of a Sequence Defined by an Explicit Formula 
One way to describe an ordered list of numbers is as a sequence. A sequence is a function whose domain is a subset of 
the counting numbers. The sequence established by the number of hits on the website is 

The ellipsis (…) indicates that the sequence continues indefinitely. Each number in the sequence is called a term. The first 
five terms of this sequence are 2, 4, 8, 16, and 32. 
Listing all of the terms for a sequence can be cumbersome. For example, finding the number of hits on the website at 
the end of the month would require listing out as many as 31 terms. A more efficient way to determine a specific term is 
by writing a formula to define the sequence. 
One type of formula is an explicit formula, which defines the terms of a sequence using their position in the sequence. 
Explicit formulas are helpful if we want to find a specific term of a sequence without finding all of the previous terms. We 
can use the formula to find the nth term of the sequence, where  is any positive number. In our example, each number 
in the sequence is double the previous number, so we can use powers of 2 to write a formula for the  term. 

The first term of the sequence is  the second term is  the third term is  and so on. The  term of 
the sequence can be found by raising 2 to the  power. An explicit formula for a sequence is named by a lower case 
letter  with the subscript  The explicit formula for this sequence is 

Now that we have a formula for the  term of the sequence, we can answer the question posed at the beginning of this 
section. We were asked to find the number of hits at the end of the month, which we will take to be 31 days. To find the 
number of hits on the last day of the month, we need to find the 31st term of the sequence. We will substitute 31 for  in 
the formula. 

If the doubling trend continues, the company will get  hits on the last day of the month. That is over 2.1 
billion hits! The huge number is probably a little unrealistic because it does not take consumer interest and competition 
into account. It does, however, give the company a starting point from which to consider business decisions. 
Another way to represent the sequence is by using a table. The first five terms of the sequence and the  term of the 
sequence are shown in Table 2. 

1 2 3 4 5 

 term of the sequence, 2 4 8 16 32 

Table 2 

Graphing provides a visual representation of the sequence as a set of distinct points. We can see from the graph in 
Figure 1 that the number of hits is rising at an exponential rate. This particular sequence forms an exponential function. 

Access for free at openstax.org



13.1 • Sequences and Their Notations     1197

Figure 1 
Lastly, we can write this particular sequence as 

A sequence that continues indefinitely is called an infinite sequence. The domain of an infinite sequence is the set of 
counting numbers. If we consider only the first 10 terms of the sequence, we could write 

This sequence is called a finite sequence because it does not continue indefinitely. 

Sequence 

A sequence is a function whose domain is the set of positive integers. A finite sequence is a sequence whose 
domain consists of only the first  positive integers. The numbers in a sequence are called terms. The variable  with 
a number subscript is used to represent the terms in a sequence and to indicate the position of the term in the 
sequence. 

We call  the first term of the sequence,  the second term of the sequence,  the third term of the sequence, and 
so on. The term  is called the nth term of the sequence, or the general term of the sequence. An explicit formula 
defines the  term of a sequence using the position of the term. A sequence that continues indefinitely is an 
infinite sequence. 

 Q&A Does a sequence always have to begin with 

No. In certain problems, it may be useful to define the initial term as  instead of  In these 
problems, the domain of the function includes 0. 

...
HOW TO 

Given an explicit formula, write the first  terms of a sequence. 

1. Substitute each value of  into the formula. Begin with  to find the first term, 
2. To find the second term,  use 
3. Continue in the same manner until you have identified all  terms. 



1198     13 • Sequences, Probability, and Counting Theory

EXAMPLE 1 

Writing the Terms of a Sequence Defined by an Explicit Formula 
Write the first five terms of the sequence defined by the explicit formula 

Solution 
Substitute  into the formula. Repeat with values 2 through 5 for 

The first five terms are 

Analysis 
The sequence values can be listed in a table. A table, such as Table 3, is a convenient way to input the function into a 
graphing utility. 

1 2 3 4 5 

5 2 –1 –4 –7 

Table 3 

A graph can be made from this table of values. From the graph in Figure 2, we can see that this sequence represents a 
linear function, but notice the graph is not continuous because the domain is over the positive integers only. 

Figure 2 

 TRY IT #1 Write the first five terms of the sequence defined by the explicit formula 

Investigating Alternating Sequences 
Sometimes sequences have terms that are alternate. In fact, the terms may actually alternate in sign. The steps to 
finding terms of the sequence are the same as if the signs did not alternate. However, the resulting terms will not show 
increase or decrease as  increases. Let’s take a look at the following sequence. 

Notice the first term is greater than the second term, the second term is less than the third term, and the third term is 
greater than the fourth term. This trend continues forever. Do not rearrange the terms in numerical order to interpret 
the sequence. 

Access for free at openstax.org



13.1 • Sequences and Their Notations     1199

...
HOW TO 

Given an explicit formula with alternating terms, write the first  terms of a sequence. 

1. Substitute each value of  into the formula. Begin with  to find the first term,  The sign of the term is 
given by the  in the explicit formula. 

2. To find the second term,  use 
3. Continue in the same manner until you have identified all  terms. 

EXAMPLE 2 

Writing the Terms of an Alternating Sequence Defined by an Explicit Formula 
Write the first five terms of the sequence. 

Solution 
Substitute   and so on in the formula. 

The first five terms are 

Analysis 
The graph of this function, shown in Figure 3, looks different from the ones we have seen previously in this section 
because the terms of the sequence alternate between positive and negative values. 

Figure 3 

 Q&A In Example 2, does the (–1) to the power of  account for the oscillations of signs? 



1200     13 • Sequences, Probability, and Counting Theory

Yes, the power might be  and so on, but any odd powers will result in a negative term, 
and any even power will result in a positive term. 

 TRY IT #2 Write the first five terms of the sequence. 

Investigating Piecewise Explicit Formulas 
We’ve learned that sequences are functions whose domain is over the positive integers. This is true for other types of 
functions, including some piecewise functions. Recall that a piecewise function is a function defined by multiple 
subsections. A different formula might represent each individual subsection. 

...
HOW TO 

Given an explicit formula for a piecewise function, write the first  terms of a sequence 

1. Identify the formula to which  applies. 
2. To find the first term,  use  in the appropriate formula. 
3. Identify the formula to which  applies. 
4. To find the second term,  use  in the appropriate formula. 
5. Continue in the same manner until you have identified all  terms. 

EXAMPLE 3 

Writing the Terms of a Sequence Defined by a Piecewise Explicit Formula 
Write the first six terms of the sequence. 

Solution 
Substitute  and so on in the appropriate formula. Use  when  is not a multiple of 3. Use  when  is a 
multiple of 3. 

The first six terms are 

Analysis 
Every third point on the graph shown in Figure 4 stands out from the two nearby points. This occurs because the 
sequence was defined by a piecewise function. 

Access for free at openstax.org



13.1 • Sequences and Their Notations     1201

Figure 4 

 TRY IT #3 Write the first six terms of the sequence. 

Finding an Explicit Formula 
Thus far, we have been given the explicit formula and asked to find a number of terms of the sequence. Sometimes, the 
explicit formula for the  term of a sequence is not given. Instead, we are given several terms from the sequence. 
When this happens, we can work in reverse to find an explicit formula from the first few terms of a sequence. The key to 
finding an explicit formula is to look for a pattern in the terms. Keep in mind that the pattern may involve alternating 
terms, formulas for numerators, formulas for denominators, exponents, or bases. 

...
HOW TO 

Given the first few terms of a sequence, find an explicit formula for the sequence. 

1. Look for a pattern among the terms. 
2. If the terms are fractions, look for a separate pattern among the numerators and denominators. 
3. Look for a pattern among the signs of the terms. 
4. Write a formula for  in terms of  Test your formula for  and 

EXAMPLE 4 

Writing an Explicit Formula for the nth Term of a Sequence 
Write an explicit formula for the  term of each sequence. 

ⓐ   ⓑ   ⓒ  
Solution 

Look for the pattern in each sequence. 

ⓐ The terms alternate between positive and negative. We can use  to make the terms alternate. The 
numerator can be represented by  The denominator can be represented by 



1202     13 • Sequences, Probability, and Counting Theory

ⓑ 
The terms are all negative. 

So we know that the fraction is negative, the numerator is 2, and the denominator can be represented by 

ⓒ 
The terms are powers of  For  the first term is  so the exponent must be 

 TRY IT #4 Write an explicit formula for the  term of the sequence. 

 TRY IT #5 Write an explicit formula for the  term of the sequence. 

 TRY IT #6 Write an explicit formula for the  term of the sequence. 

Writing the Terms of a Sequence Defined by a Recursive Formula 
Sequences occur naturally in the growth patterns of nautilus shells, pinecones, tree branches, and many other natural 
structures. We may see the sequence in the leaf or branch arrangement, the number of petals of a flower, or the pattern 
of the chambers in a nautilus shell. Their growth follows the Fibonacci sequence, a famous sequence in which each term 
can be found by adding the preceding two terms. The numbers in the sequence are 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21, 34,…. Other 
examples from the natural world that exhibit the Fibonacci sequence are the Calla Lily, which has just one petal, the 
Black-Eyed Susan with 13 petals, and different varieties of daisies that may have 21 or 34 petals. 
Each term of the Fibonacci sequence depends on the terms that come before it. The Fibonacci sequence cannot easily be 
written using an explicit formula. Instead, we describe the sequence using a recursive formula, a formula that defines 
the terms of a sequence using previous terms. 
A recursive formula always has two parts: the value of an initial term (or terms), and an equation defining  in terms of 
preceding terms. For example, suppose we know the following: 

We can find the subsequent terms of the sequence using the first term. 

So the first four terms of the sequence are  . 
The recursive formula for the Fibonacci sequence states the first two terms and defines each successive term as the sum 
of the preceding two terms. 

Access for free at openstax.org



13.1 • Sequences and Their Notations     1203

To find the tenth term of the sequence, for example, we would need to add the eighth and ninth terms. We were told 
previously that the eighth and ninth terms are 21 and 34, so 

Recursive Formula 

A recursive formula is a formula that defines each term of a sequence using preceding term(s). Recursive formulas 
must always state the initial term, or terms, of the sequence. 

 Q&A Must the first two terms always be given in a recursive formula? 

No. The Fibonacci sequence defines each term using the two preceding terms, but many recursive 
formulas define each term using only one preceding term. These sequences need only the first term to 
be defined. 

...
HOW TO 

Given a recursive formula with only the first term provided, write the first  terms of a sequence. 

1. Identify the initial term,  which is given as part of the formula. This is the first term. 
2. To find the second term,  substitute the initial term into the formula for  Solve. 
3. To find the third term,  substitute the second term into the formula. Solve. 
4. Repeat until you have solved for the  term. 

EXAMPLE 5 

Writing the Terms of a Sequence Defined by a Recursive Formula 
Write the first five terms of the sequence defined by the recursive formula. 

Solution 
The first term is given in the formula. For each subsequent term, we replace  with the value of the preceding term. 

The first five terms are  See Figure 5. 



1204     13 • Sequences, Probability, and Counting Theory

Figure 5 

 TRY IT #7 Write the first five terms of the sequence defined by the recursive formula. 

...
HOW TO 

Given a recursive formula with two initial terms, write the first  terms of a sequence. 

1. Identify the initial term,  which is given as part of the formula. 
2. Identify the second term,  which is given as part of the formula. 
3. To find the third term, substitute the initial term and the second term into the formula. Evaluate. 
4. Repeat until you have evaluated the  term. 

EXAMPLE 6 

Writing the Terms of a Sequence Defined by a Recursive Formula 
Write the first six terms of the sequence defined by the recursive formula. 

Solution 
The first two terms are given. For each subsequent term, we replace  and  with the values of the two preceding 
terms. 

The first six terms are  See Figure 6. 

Access for free at openstax.org



13.1 • Sequences and Their Notations     1205

Figure 6 

 TRY IT #8 Write the first 8 terms of the sequence defined by the recursive formula. 

Using Factorial Notation 
The formulas for some sequences include products of consecutive positive integers.  factorial, written as  is the 
product of the positive integers from 1 to  For example, 

An example of formula containing a factorial is  The sixth term of the sequence can be found by 
substituting 6 for 

The factorial of any whole number  is  We can therefore also think of  as 

n Factorial 

n factorial is a mathematical operation that can be defined using a recursive formula. The factorial of  denoted 
is defined for a positive integer  as: 

The special case  is defined as 

 Q&A Can factorials always be found using a calculator? 

No. Factorials get large very quickly—faster than even exponential functions! When the output gets too 
large for the calculator, it will not be able to calculate the factorial. 



1206     13 • Sequences, Probability, and Counting Theory

EXAMPLE 7 

Writing the Terms of a Sequence Using Factorials 
Write the first five terms of the sequence defined by the explicit formula 

Solution 
Substitute  and so on in the formula. 

The first five terms are 

Analysis 
Figure 7 shows the graph of the sequence. Notice that, since factorials grow very quickly, the presence of the factorial 
term in the denominator results in the denominator becoming much larger than the numerator as  increases. This 
means the quotient gets smaller and, as the plot of the terms shows, the terms are decreasing and nearing zero. 

Figure 7 

 TRY IT #9 Write the first five terms of the sequence defined by the explicit formula 

 MEDIA 

Access this online resource for additional instruction and practice with sequences. 

Finding Terms in a Sequence (https://openstax.org/l/findingterms) 

 13.1 SECTION EXERCISES 
Verbal 

1 . Discuss the meaning of a  2 . Describe three ways that a  3 . Is the ordered set of even 
sequence. If a finite sequence can be defined. numbers an infinite 
sequence is defined by a sequence? What about the 
formula, what is its domain? ordered set of odd 
What about an infinite numbers? Explain why or 
sequence? why not. 

Access for free at openstax.org



13.1 • Sequences and Their Notations     1207

4 . What happens to the terms  5 . What is a factorial, and how 
 of a sequence when is it denoted? Use an 

there is a negative factor in example to illustrate how 
the formula that is raised to factorial notation can be 
a power that includes beneficial. 
What is the term used to 
describe this phenomenon? 

Algebraic 

For the following exercises, write the first four terms of the sequence. 

6 .  7 .  8 . 

9 .  10 .  11 . 

12 .  13 .  14 . 

15 . 

For the following exercises, write the first eight terms of the piecewise sequence. 

16 .  17 . 

18 .  19 . 

20 . 

For the following exercises, write an explicit formula for each sequence. 

21 .  22 .  23 . 

24 .  25 . 

For the following exercises, write the first five terms of the sequence. 

26 .  27 .  28 . 

29 .  30 . 

For the following exercises, write the first eight terms of the sequence. 

31 .  32 . 

33 . 

For the following exercises, write a recursive formula for each sequence. 
34 .  35 .  36 . 

37 .  38 . 



1208     13 • Sequences, Probability, and Counting Theory

For the following exercises, evaluate the factorial. 

39 .  40 .  41 . 

42 . 

For the following exercises, write the first four terms of the sequence. 

43 .  44 .  45 . 

46 . 

Graphical 

For the following exercises, graph the first five terms of the indicated sequence 

47 . 48 .  49 . 

50 .  51 . 

For the following exercises, write an explicit formula for the sequence using the first five points shown on the graph. 
52 . 53 . 54 . 

For the following exercises, write a recursive formula for the sequence using the first five points shown on the graph. 
55 . 56 . 

Technology 

Follow these steps to evaluate a sequence defined recursively using a graphing calculator: 

• On the home screen, key in the value for the initial term  and press [ENTER]. 

• Enter the recursive formula by keying in all numerical values given in the formula, along with the key strokes [2ND] 
ANS for the previous term  Press [ENTER]. 

• Continue pressing [ENTER] to calculate the values for each successive term. 

Access for free at openstax.org



13.1 • Sequences and Their Notations     1209

For the following exercises, use the steps above to find the indicated term or terms for the sequence. 
57 . Find the first five terms of  58 . Find the 15th term of the  59 . Find the first five terms of 

the sequence , sequence , the sequence , 
 Use the 

>Frac feature to give 
fractional results. 

60 . Find the first ten terms of  61 . Find the tenth term of the 
the sequence , sequence , 

Follow these steps to evaluate a finite sequence defined by an explicit formula. Using a TI-84, do the following. 

• In the home screen, press [2ND] LIST. 

• Scroll over to OPS and choose “seq(” from the dropdown list. Press [ENTER]. 

• In the line headed “Expr:” type in the explicit formula, using the  button for 

• In the line headed “Variable:” type in the variable used on the previous step. 

• In the line headed “start:” key in the value of  that begins the sequence. 

• In the line headed “end:” key in the value of  that ends the sequence. 

• Press [ENTER] 3 times to return to the home screen. You will see the sequence syntax on the screen. Press [ENTER] 
to see the list of terms for the finite sequence defined. Use the right arrow key to scroll through the list of terms. 

Using a TI-83, do the following. 

• In the home screen, press [2ND] LIST. 

• Scroll over to OPS and choose “seq(” from the dropdown list. Press [ENTER]. 

• Enter the items in the order “Expr”, “Variable”, “start”, “end” separated by commas. See the instructions above for 
the description of each item. 

• Press [ENTER] to see the list of terms for the finite sequence defined. Use the right arrow key to scroll through the 
list of terms. 

For the following exercises, use the steps above to find the indicated terms for the sequence. Round to the nearest 
thousandth when necessary. 
62 . List the first five terms of  63 . List the first six terms of  64 . List the first five terms of 

the sequence the sequence the sequence 

65 . List the first four terms of  66 . List the first six terms of 
the sequence the sequence 

Extensions 

67 . Consider the sequence  68 . What term in the sequence  69 . Find a recursive formula 
defined by  has the for the sequence 1, 0, −1, 
Is  a term in the −1, 0, 1, 1, 0, −1, −1, 0, 1, 1, 
sequence? Verify the result. value  Verify the result. .... (Hint: find a pattern for 

 based on the first two 
terms.) 



1210     13 • Sequences, Probability, and Counting Theory

70 . Calculate the first eight terms of the sequences  71 . Prove the conjecture made in the preceding 
 and  and then exercise. 

make a conjecture about the relationship between 
these two sequences. 

13.2 Arithmetic Sequences 
Learning Objectives 
In this section, you will: 

Find the common difference for an arithmetic sequence. 
Write terms of an arithmetic sequence. 
Use a recursive formula for an arithmetic sequence. 
Use an explicit formula for an arithmetic sequence. 

Companies often make large purchases, such as computers and vehicles, for business use. The book-value of these 
supplies decreases each year for tax purposes. This decrease in value is called depreciation. One method of calculating 
depreciation is straight-line depreciation, in which the value of the asset decreases by the same amount each year. 
As an example, consider a woman who starts a small contracting business. She purchases a new truck for $25,000. After 
five years, she estimates that she will be able to sell the truck for $8,000. The loss in value of the truck will therefore be 
$17,000, which is $3,400 per year for five years. The truck will be worth $21,600 after the first year; $18,200 after two 
years; $14,800 after three years; $11,400 after four years; and $8,000 at the end of five years. In this section, we will 
consider specific kinds of sequences that will allow us to calculate depreciation, such as the truck’s value. 

Finding Common Differences 
The values of the truck in the example are said to form an arithmetic sequence because they change by a constant 
amount each year. Each term increases or decreases by the same constant value called the common difference of the 
sequence. For this sequence, the common difference is –3,400. 

The sequence below is another example of an arithmetic sequence. In this case, the constant difference is 3. You can 
choose any term of the sequence, and add 3 to find the subsequent term. 

Arithmetic Sequence 

An arithmetic sequence is a sequence that has the property that the difference between any two consecutive terms 
is a constant. This constant is called the common difference. If  is the first term of an arithmetic sequence and  is 
the common difference, the sequence will be: 

EXAMPLE 1 

Finding Common Differences 
Is each sequence arithmetic? If so, find the common difference. 

ⓐ   ⓑ  
Solution 

Subtract each term from the subsequent term to determine whether a common difference exists. 

ⓐ The sequence is not arithmetic because there is no common difference. 

Access for free at openstax.org



13.2 • Arithmetic Sequences     1211

ⓑ The sequence is arithmetic because there is a common difference. The common difference is 4. 

Analysis 
The graph of each of these sequences is shown in Figure 1. We can see from the graphs that, although both sequences 
show growth,  is not linear whereas  is linear. Arithmetic sequences have a constant rate of change so their graphs will 
always be points on a line. 

Figure 1 

 Q&A If we are told that a sequence is arithmetic, do we have to subtract every term from the 
following term to find the common difference? 

No. If we know that the sequence is arithmetic, we can choose any one term in the sequence, and 
subtract it from the subsequent term to find the common difference. 

 TRY IT #1 Is the given sequence arithmetic? If so, find the common difference. 

 TRY IT #2 Is the given sequence arithmetic? If so, find the common difference. 

Writing Terms of Arithmetic Sequences 
Now that we can recognize an arithmetic sequence, we will find the terms if we are given the first term and the common 
difference. The terms can be found by beginning with the first term and adding the common difference repeatedly. In 
addition, any term can also be found by plugging in the values of  and  into formula below. 

...
HOW TO 

Given the first term and the common difference of an arithmetic sequence, find the first several terms. 

1. Add the common difference to the first term to find the second term. 
2. Add the common difference to the second term to find the third term. 
3. Continue until all of the desired terms are identified. 
4. Write the terms separated by commas within brackets. 



1212     13 • Sequences, Probability, and Counting Theory

EXAMPLE 2 

Writing Terms of Arithmetic Sequences 
Write the first five terms of the arithmetic sequence with  and  . 

Solution 
Adding  is the same as subtracting 3. Beginning with the first term, subtract 3 from each term to find the next term. 
The first five terms are 

Analysis 
As expected, the graph of the sequence consists of points on a line as shown in Figure 2. 

Figure 2 

 TRY IT #3 List the first five terms of the arithmetic sequence with  and  . 

...
HOW TO 

Given any first term and any other term in an arithmetic sequence, find a given term. 

1. Substitute the values given for  into the formula  to solve for 
2. Find a given term by substituting the appropriate values for  and  into the formula 

EXAMPLE 3 

Writing Terms of Arithmetic Sequences 
Given  and  , find  . 

Solution 
The sequence can be written in terms of the initial term 8 and the common difference  . 

We know the fourth term equals 14; we know the fourth term has the form  . 
We can find the common difference  . 

Find the fifth term by adding the common difference to the fourth term. 

Access for free at openstax.org



13.2 • Arithmetic Sequences     1213

Analysis 
Notice that the common difference is added to the first term once to find the second term, twice to find the third term, 
three times to find the fourth term, and so on. The tenth term could be found by adding the common difference to the 
first term nine times or by using the equation 

 TRY IT #4 Given  and  , find  . 

Using Recursive Formulas for Arithmetic Sequences 
Some arithmetic sequences are defined in terms of the previous term using a recursive formula. The formula provides 
an algebraic rule for determining the terms of the sequence. A recursive formula allows us to find any term of an 
arithmetic sequence using a function of the preceding term. Each term is the sum of the previous term and the common 
difference. For example, if the common difference is 5, then each term is the previous term plus 5. As with any recursive 
formula, the first term must be given. 

Recursive Formula for an Arithmetic Sequence 

The recursive formula for an arithmetic sequence with common difference  is: 

...
HOW TO 

Given an arithmetic sequence, write its recursive formula. 

1. Subtract any term from the subsequent term to find the common difference. 
2. State the initial term and substitute the common difference into the recursive formula for arithmetic sequences. 

EXAMPLE 4 

Writing a Recursive Formula for an Arithmetic Sequence 
Write a recursive formula for the arithmetic sequence. 

Solution 
The first term is given as  . The common difference can be found by subtracting the first term from the second term. 

Substitute the initial term and the common difference into the recursive formula for arithmetic sequences. 

Analysis 
We see that the common difference is the slope of the line formed when we graph the terms of the sequence, as shown 
in Figure 3. The growth pattern of the sequence shows the constant difference of 11 units. 



1214     13 • Sequences, Probability, and Counting Theory

Figure 3 

 Q&A Do we have to subtract the first term from the second term to find the common difference? 

No. We can subtract any term in the sequence from the subsequent term. It is, however, most common 
to subtract the first term from the second term because it is often the easiest method of finding the 
common difference. 

 TRY IT #5 Write a recursive formula for the arithmetic sequence. 

Using Explicit Formulas for Arithmetic Sequences 
We can think of an arithmetic sequence as a function on the domain of the natural numbers; it is a linear function 
because it has a constant rate of change. The common difference is the constant rate of change, or the slope of the 
function. We can construct the linear function if we know the slope and the vertical intercept. 

To find the y-intercept of the function, we can subtract the common difference from the first term of the sequence. 
Consider the following sequence. 

The common difference is  , so the sequence represents a linear function with a slope of  . To find the 
-intercept, we subtract  from  . You can also find the  -intercept by graphing 
the function and determining where a line that connects the points would intersect the vertical axis. The graph is shown 
in Figure 4. 

Figure 4 
Recall the slope-intercept form of a line is  When dealing with sequences, we use  in place of  and  in 
place of  If we know the slope and vertical intercept of the function, we can substitute them for  and  in the slope-
intercept form of a line. Substituting  for the slope and  for the vertical intercept, we get the following equation: 

Access for free at openstax.org



13.2 • Arithmetic Sequences     1215

We do not need to find the vertical intercept to write an explicit formula for an arithmetic sequence. Another explicit 
formula for this sequence is  , which simplifies to 

Explicit Formula for an Arithmetic Sequence 

An explicit formula for the  term of an arithmetic sequence is given by 

...
HOW TO 

Given the first several terms for an arithmetic sequence, write an explicit formula. 

1. Find the common difference, 
2. Substitute the common difference and the first term into 

EXAMPLE 5 

Writing the nth Term Explicit Formula for an Arithmetic Sequence 
Write an explicit formula for the arithmetic sequence. 

Solution 
The common difference can be found by subtracting the first term from the second term. 

The common difference is 10. Substitute the common difference and the first term of the sequence into the formula and 
simplify. 

Analysis 
The graph of this sequence, represented in Figure 5, shows a slope of 10 and a vertical intercept of  . 

Figure 5 

 TRY IT #6 Write an explicit formula for the following arithmetic sequence. 



1216     13 • Sequences, Probability, and Counting Theory

Finding the Number of Terms in a Finite Arithmetic Sequence 
Explicit formulas can be used to determine the number of terms in a finite arithmetic sequence. We need to find the 
common difference, and then determine how many times the common difference must be added to the first term to 
obtain the final term of the sequence. 

...
HOW TO 

Given the first three terms and the last term of a finite arithmetic sequence, find the total number of terms. 

1. Find the common difference 
2. Substitute the common difference and the first term into 
3. Substitute the last term for  and solve for 

EXAMPLE 6 

Finding the Number of Terms in a Finite Arithmetic Sequence 
Find the number of terms in the finite arithmetic sequence. 

Solution 
The common difference can be found by subtracting the first term from the second term. 

The common difference is  . Substitute the common difference and the initial term of the sequence into the  term 
formula and simplify. 

Substitute  for  and solve for 

There are eight terms in the sequence. 

 TRY IT #7 Find the number of terms in the finite arithmetic sequence. 

Solving Application Problems with Arithmetic Sequences 
In many application problems, it often makes sense to use an initial term of  instead of  In these problems, we alter 
the explicit formula slightly to account for the difference in initial terms. We use the following formula: 

EXAMPLE 7 

Solving Application Problems with Arithmetic Sequences 
A five-year old child receives an allowance of $1 each week. His parents promise him an annual increase of $2 per week. 

ⓐ Write a formula for the child’s weekly allowance in a given year. 
ⓑ What will the child’s allowance be when he is 16 years old? 

Access for free at openstax.org



13.2 • Arithmetic Sequences     1217

Solution 
ⓐ 
The situation can be modeled by an arithmetic sequence with an initial term of 1 and a common difference of 2. 
Let  be the amount of the allowance and  be the number of years after age 5. Using the altered explicit formula for 
an arithmetic sequence we get: 

ⓑ 
We can find the number of years since age 5 by subtracting. 

We are looking for the child’s allowance after 11 years. Substitute 11 into the formula to find the child’s allowance at 
age 16. 

The child’s allowance at age 16 will be $23 per week. 

 TRY IT #8 A woman decides to go for a 10-minute run every day this week and plans to increase the time of 
her daily run by 4 minutes each week. Write a formula for the time of her run after n weeks. How 
long will her daily run be 8 weeks from today? 

 MEDIA 

Access this online resource for additional instruction and practice with arithmetic sequences. 

Arithmetic Sequences (https://openstax.org/l/arithmeticseq) 

 13.2 SECTION EXERCISES 
Verbal 

1 . What is an arithmetic  2 . How is the common 3 . How do we determine 
sequence? difference of an arithmetic whether a sequence is 

sequence found? arithmetic? 
4 . What are the main 5 . Describe how linear 

differences between using a functions and arithmetic 
recursive formula and using sequences are similar. How 
an explicit formula to are they different? 
describe an arithmetic 
sequence? 

Algebraic 

For the following exercises, find the common difference for the arithmetic sequence provided. 

6 . 7 . 

For the following exercises, determine whether the sequence is arithmetic. If so find the common difference. 
8 .  9 . 

For the following exercises, write the first five terms of the arithmetic sequence given the first term and common 
difference. 

10 .  ,  11 .  , 



1218     13 • Sequences, Probability, and Counting Theory

For the following exercises, write the first five terms of the arithmetic series given two terms. 
12 .  13 . 

For the following exercises, find the specified term for the arithmetic sequence given the first term and common 
difference. 
14 . First term is 3, common  15 . First term is 4, common  16 . First term is 5, common 

difference is 4, find the 5th difference is 5, find the 4th difference is 6, find the 8th 

term. term. term. 
17 . First term is 6, common  18 . First term is 7, common 

difference is 7, find the 6th difference is 8, find the 7th 

term. term. 

For the following exercises, find the first term given two terms from an arithmetic sequence. 
19 . Find the first term or  of  20 . Find the first term or  of 21 . Find the first term or  of 

an arithmetic sequence if an arithmetic sequence if an arithmetic sequence if 
 and  and  and 

22 . Find the first term or  of  23 . Find the first term or  of 
an arithmetic sequence if an arithmetic sequence if 

 and  and 

For the following exercises, find the specified term given two terms from an arithmetic sequence. 
24 .  and  25 .  and 

Find  Find 

For the following exercises, use the recursive formula to write the first five terms of the arithmetic sequence. 
26 .  27 . 

For the following exercises, write a recursive formula for each arithmetic sequence. 
28 .  29 .  30 . 
31 .  32 .  33 . 

34 .  35 .  36 . 

37 . 

For the following exercises, write a recursive formula for the given arithmetic sequence, and then find the specified term. 
38 .  Find the 39 .  Find  40 .  Find the 

17th term. the 14th term. 12th term. 

For the following exercises, use the explicit formula to write the first five terms of the arithmetic sequence. 

41 .  42 . 

For the following exercises, write an explicit formula for each arithmetic sequence. 
43 .  44 .  45 . 
46 .  47 .  48 . 

49 . 50 .  51 . 

52 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



13.2 • Arithmetic Sequences     1219

For the following exercises, find the number of terms in the given finite arithmetic sequence. 

53 .  54 .  55 . 

Graphical 

For the following exercises, determine whether the graph shown represents an arithmetic sequence. 
56 . 



1220     13 • Sequences, Probability, and Counting Theory

57 . 

For the following exercises, use the information provided to graph the first 5 terms of the arithmetic sequence. 
58 .  59 . 60 . 

Technology 

For the following exercises, follow the steps to work with the arithmetic sequence  using a graphing 
calculator: 

• Press [MODE] 

◦ Select SEQ in the fourth line 

◦ Select DOT in the fifth line 

◦ Press [ENTER] 

• Press [Y=] 

◦  is the first counting number for the sequence. Set 

◦  is the pattern for the sequence. Set 

◦  is the first number in the sequence. Set 

• Press [2ND] then [WINDOW] to go to TBLSET 

◦ Set 

◦ Set 

◦ Set Indpnt: Auto and Depend: Auto 

• Press [2ND] then [GRAPH] to go to the TABLE 

Access for free at openstax.org



13.3 • Geometric Sequences     1221

61 . What are the first seven  62 . Use the scroll-down arrow  63 . Press [WINDOW]. Set 
terms shown in the column to scroll to  What , , 
with the heading value is given for , , 

, and 
 Then press 

[GRAPH]. Graph the 
sequence as it appears on 
the graphing calculator. 

For the following exercises, follow the steps given above to work with the arithmetic sequence  using a 
graphing calculator. 
64 . What are the first seven  65 . Graph the sequence as it 

terms shown in the column appears on the graphing 
with the heading  in calculator. Be sure to adjust 
the TABLE feature? the WINDOW settings as 

needed. 

Extensions 

66 . Give two examples of  67 . Give two examples of  68 . Find the 5th term of the 
arithmetic sequences arithmetic sequences arithmetic sequence 
whose 4th terms are whose 10th terms are 

69 . Find the 11th term of the  70 . At which term does the  71 . At which term does the 
arithmetic sequence sequence sequence 

 exceed begin to have negative 
151? values? 

72 . For which terms does the  73 . Write an arithmetic  74 . Write an arithmetic 
finite arithmetic sequence sequence using a recursive sequence using an explicit 

 have formula. Show the first 4 formula. Show the first 4 
integer values? terms, and then find the terms, and then find the 

31st term. 28th term. 

13.3 Geometric Sequences 
Learning Objectives 
In this section, you will: 

Find the common ratio for a geometric sequence. 
List the terms of a geometric sequence. 
Use a recursive formula for a geometric sequence. 
Use an explicit formula for a geometric sequence. 

Many jobs offer an annual cost-of-living increase to keep salaries consistent with inflation. Suppose, for example, a 
recent college graduate finds a position as a sales manager earning an annual salary of $26,000. He is promised a 2% 
cost of living increase each year. His annual salary in any given year can be found by multiplying his salary from the 
previous year by 102%. His salary will be $26,520 after one year; $27,050.40 after two years; $27,591.41 after three years; 
and so on. When a salary increases by a constant rate each year, the salary grows by a constant factor. In this section, we 
will review sequences that grow in this way. 

Finding Common Ratios 
The yearly salary values described form a geometric sequence because they change by a constant factor each year. 
Each term of a geometric sequence increases or decreases by a constant factor called the common ratio. The sequence 
below is an example of a geometric sequence because each term increases by a constant factor of 6. Multiplying any 
term of the sequence by the common ratio 6 generates the subsequent term. 



1222     13 • Sequences, Probability, and Counting Theory

Definition of a Geometric Sequence 

A geometric sequence is one in which any term divided by the previous term is a constant. This constant is called the 
common ratio of the sequence. The common ratio can be found by dividing any term in the sequence by the 
previous term. If  is the initial term of a geometric sequence and  is the common ratio, the sequence will be 

...
HOW TO 

Given a set of numbers, determine if they represent a geometric sequence. 

1. Divide each term by the previous term. 
2. Compare the quotients. If they are the same, a common ratio exists and the sequence is geometric. 

EXAMPLE 1 

Finding Common Ratios 
Is the sequence geometric? If so, find the common ratio. 

ⓐ   ⓑ  
Solution 

Divide each term by the previous term to determine whether a common ratio exists. 

ⓐ  
The sequence is geometric because there is a common ratio. The common ratio is 2. 

ⓑ  
The sequence is not geometric because there is not a common ratio. 

Analysis 
The graph of each sequence is shown in Figure 1. It seems from the graphs that both (a) and (b) appear have the form of 
the graph of an exponential function in this viewing window. However, we know that (a) is geometric and so this 
interpretation holds, but (b) is not. 

Figure 1 

 Q&A If you are told that a sequence is geometric, do you have to divide every term by the previous 
term to find the common ratio? 

No. If you know that the sequence is geometric, you can choose any one term in the sequence and 
divide it by the previous term to find the common ratio. 

Access for free at openstax.org



13.3 • Geometric Sequences     1223

 TRY IT #1 Is the sequence geometric? If so, find the common ratio. 

 TRY IT #2 Is the sequence geometric? If so, find the common ratio. 

Writing Terms of Geometric Sequences 
Now that we can identify a geometric sequence, we will learn how to find the terms of a geometric sequence if we are 
given the first term and the common ratio. The terms of a geometric sequence can be found by beginning with the first 
term and multiplying by the common ratio repeatedly. For instance, if the first term of a geometric sequence is 
and the common ratio is  we can find subsequent terms by multiplying  to get  then multiplying the result 

 to get  and so on. 

The first four terms are 
...

HOW TO 

Given the first term and the common factor, find the first four terms of a geometric sequence. 

1. Multiply the initial term,  by the common ratio to find the next term, 
2. Repeat the process, using  to find  and then  to find  until all four terms have been identified. 
3. Write the terms separated by commons within brackets. 

EXAMPLE 2 

Writing the Terms of a Geometric Sequence 
List the first four terms of the geometric sequence with  and 

Solution 
Multiply  by  to find  Repeat the process, using  to find  and so on. 

The first four terms are 

 TRY IT #3 List the first five terms of the geometric sequence with  and 

Using Recursive Formulas for Geometric Sequences 
A recursive formula allows us to find any term of a geometric sequence by using the previous term. Each term is the 
product of the common ratio and the previous term. For example, suppose the common ratio is 9. Then each term is 
nine times the previous term. As with any recursive formula, the initial term must be given. 



1224     13 • Sequences, Probability, and Counting Theory

Recursive Formula for a Geometric Sequence 

The recursive formula for a geometric sequence with common ratio  and first term  is 

...
HOW TO 

Given the first several terms of a geometric sequence, write its recursive formula. 

1. State the initial term. 
2. Find the common ratio by dividing any term by the preceding term. 
3. Substitute the common ratio into the recursive formula for a geometric sequence. 

EXAMPLE 3 

Using Recursive Formulas for Geometric Sequences 
Write a recursive formula for the following geometric sequence. 

Solution 
The first term is given as 6. The common ratio can be found by dividing the second term by the first term. 

Substitute the common ratio into the recursive formula for geometric sequences and define 

Analysis 
The sequence of data points follows an exponential pattern. The common ratio is also the base of an exponential 
function as shown in Figure 2 

Figure 2 

 Q&A Do we have to divide the second term by the first term to find the common ratio? 

No. We can divide any term in the sequence by the previous term. It is, however, most common to 
divide the second term by the first term because it is often the easiest method of finding the common 
ratio. 

 TRY IT #4 Write a recursive formula for the following geometric sequence. 

Access for free at openstax.org



13.3 • Geometric Sequences     1225

Using Explicit Formulas for Geometric Sequences 
Because a geometric sequence is an exponential function whose domain is the set of positive integers, and the common 
ratio is the base of the function, we can write explicit formulas that allow us to find particular terms. 

Let’s take a look at the sequence  This is a geometric sequence with a common ratio of 2 and 
an exponential function with a base of 2. An explicit formula for this sequence is 

The graph of the sequence is shown in Figure 3. 

Figure 3 

Explicit Formula for a Geometric Sequence 

The  th term of a geometric sequence is given by the explicit formula: 

EXAMPLE 4 

Writing Terms of Geometric Sequences Using the Explicit Formula 
Given a geometric sequence with  and  find 

Solution 
The sequence can be written in terms of the initial term and the common ratio 

Find the common ratio using the given fourth term. 



1226     13 • Sequences, Probability, and Counting Theory

Find the second term by multiplying the first term by the common ratio. 

Analysis 
The common ratio is multiplied by the first term once to find the second term, twice to find the third term, three times to 
find the fourth term, and so on. The tenth term could be found by multiplying the first term by the common ratio nine 
times or by multiplying by the common ratio raised to the ninth power. 

 TRY IT #5 Given a geometric sequence with  and  , find 

EXAMPLE 5 

Writing an Explicit Formula for the  th Term of a Geometric Sequence 
Write an explicit formula for the  term of the following geometric sequence. 

Solution 
The first term is 2. The common ratio can be found by dividing the second term by the first term. 

The common ratio is 5. Substitute the common ratio and the first term of the sequence into the formula. 

The graph of this sequence in Figure 4 shows an exponential pattern. 

Figure 4 

 TRY IT #6 Write an explicit formula for the following geometric sequence. 

Access for free at openstax.org



13.3 • Geometric Sequences     1227

Solving Application Problems with Geometric Sequences 
In real-world scenarios involving geometric sequences, we may need to use an initial term of  instead of  In these 
problems, we can alter the explicit formula slightly by using the following formula: 

EXAMPLE 6 

Solving Application Problems with Geometric Sequences 
In 2013, the number of students in a small school is 284. It is estimated that the student population will increase by 4% 
each year. 

ⓐ Write a formula for the student population.  ⓑ Estimate the student population in 2020. 
Solution 

ⓐ 
The situation can be modeled by a geometric sequence with an initial term of 284. The student population will be 
104% of the prior year, so the common ratio is 1.04. 
Let  be the student population and  be the number of years after 2013. Using the explicit formula for a geometric 
sequence we get 

ⓑ 
We can find the number of years since 2013 by subtracting. 

We are looking for the population after 7 years. We can substitute 7 for  to estimate the population in 2020. 

The student population will be about 374 in 2020. 

 TRY IT #7 A business starts a new website. Initially the number of hits is 293 due to the curiosity factor. The 
business estimates the number of hits will increase by 2.6% per week. 

ⓐ Write a formula for the number of hits.  ⓑ Estimate the number of hits in 5 weeks. 

 MEDIA 

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with geometric sequences. 

Geometric Sequences (https://openstax.org/l/geometricseq) 
Determine the Type of Sequence (https://openstax.org/l/sequencetype) 
Find the Formula for a Sequence (https://openstax.org/l/sequenceformula) 

 13.3 SECTION EXERCISES 
Verbal 

1 . What is a geometric  2 . How is the common ratio of  3 . What is the procedure for 
sequence? a geometric sequence determining whether a 

found? sequence is geometric? 
4 . What is the difference  5 . Describe how exponential 

between an arithmetic functions and geometric 
sequence and a geometric sequences are similar. How 
sequence? are they different? 



1228     13 • Sequences, Probability, and Counting Theory

Algebraic 

For the following exercises, find the common ratio for the geometric sequence. 

6 .  7 .  8 . 

For the following exercises, determine whether the sequence is geometric. If so, find the common ratio. 

9 .  10 .  11 . 

12 .  13 . 

For the following exercises, write the first five terms of the geometric sequence, given the first term and common ratio. 

14 .  15 . 

For the following exercises, write the first five terms of the geometric sequence, given any two terms. 
16 .  17 . 

For the following exercises, find the specified term for the geometric sequence, given the first term and common ratio. 
18 . The first term is  and the  19 . The first term is 16 and the 

common ratio is  Find the common ratio is  Find 
5th term. the 4th term. 

For the following exercises, find the specified term for the geometric sequence, given the first four terms. 

20 .  21 . 
Find Find 

For the following exercises, write the first five terms of the geometric sequence. 

22 .  23 . 

For the following exercises, write a recursive formula for each geometric sequence. 
24 .  25 .  26 . 

27 .  28 .  29 . 

30 .  31 . 

For the following exercises, write the first five terms of the geometric sequence. 

32 .  33 . 

For the following exercises, write an explicit formula for each geometric sequence. 
34 .  35 .  36 . 

37 .  38 .  39 . 

40 .  41 . 

For the following exercises, find the specified term for the geometric sequence given. 

42 . Let   43 . Let  Find 
Find 

Access for free at openstax.org



13.3 • Geometric Sequences     1229

For the following exercises, find the number of terms in the given finite geometric sequence. 

44 .  45 . 

Graphical 

For the following exercises, determine whether the graph shown represents a geometric sequence. 
46 .  47 . 

For the following exercises, use the information provided to graph the first five terms of the geometric sequence. 

48 .  49 . 50 . 

Extensions 

51 . Use recursive formulas to  52 . Use explicit formulas to  53 . Find the 5th term of the 
give two examples of give two examples of geometric sequence 
geometric sequences geometric sequences 
whose 3rd terms are whose 7th terms are 

54 . Find the 7th term of the geometric  55 . At which term does the  56 . At which term does the 
sequence sequence sequence 

exceed begin to have integer 
values? 

57 . For which term does the  58 . Use the recursive formula  59 . Use the explicit formula to 
geometric sequence to write a geometric write a geometric 

 first sequence whose common sequence whose common 
have a non-integer value? ratio is an integer. Show ratio is a decimal number 

the first four terms, and between 0 and 1. Show the 
then find the 10th term. first 4 terms, and then find 

the 8th term. 
60 . Is it possible for a 

sequence to be both 
arithmetic and geometric? 
If so, give an example. 



1230     13 • Sequences, Probability, and Counting Theory

13.4 Series and Their Notations 
Learning Objectives 
In this section, you will: 

Use summation notation. 
Use the formula for the sum of the first n terms of an arithmetic series. 
Use the formula for the sum of the first n terms of a geometric series. 
Use the formula for the sum of an infinite geometric series. 
Solve annuity problems. 

A parent decides to start a college fund for their daughter. They plan to invest $50 in the fund each month. The fund pays 
6% annual interest, compounded monthly. How much money will they have saved when their daughter is ready to start 
college in 6 years? In this section, we will learn how to answer this question. To do so, we need to consider the amount of 
money invested and the amount of interest earned. 

Using Summation Notation 
To find the total amount of money in the college fund and the sum of the amounts deposited, we need to add the 
amounts deposited each month and the amounts earned monthly. The sum of the terms of a sequence is called a series. 
Consider, for example, the following series. 

The nth partial sum of a series is the sum of a finite number of consecutive terms beginning with the first term. The 
notation  represents the partial sum. 

Summation notation is used to represent series. Summation notation is often known as sigma notation because it uses 
the Greek capital letter sigma,  to represent the sum. Summation notation includes an explicit formula and specifies 
the first and last terms in the series. An explicit formula for each term of the series is given to the right of the sigma. A 
variable called the index of summation is written below the sigma. The index of summation is set equal to the lower 
limit of summation, which is the number used to generate the first term in the series. The number above the sigma, 
called the upper limit of summation, is the number used to generate the last term in a series. 

If we interpret the given notation, we see that it asks us to find the sum of the terms in the series  for 
through  We can begin by substituting the terms for  and listing out the terms of this series. 

We can find the sum of the series by adding the terms: 

Summation Notation 

The sum of the first  terms of a series can be expressed in summation notation as follows: 

Access for free at openstax.org



13.4 • Series and Their Notations     1231

This notation tells us to find the sum of  from  to 

 is called the index of summation, 1 is the lower limit of summation, and  is the upper limit of summation. 

 Q&A Does the lower limit of summation have to be 1? 

No. The lower limit of summation can be any number, but 1 is frequently used. We will look at 
examples with lower limits of summation other than 1. 

...
HOW TO 

Given summation notation for a series, evaluate the value. 

1. Identify the lower limit of summation. 
2. Identify the upper limit of summation. 
3. Substitute each value of  from the lower limit to the upper limit into the formula. 
4. Add to find the sum. 

EXAMPLE 1 

Using Summation Notation 

Evaluate 

Solution 
According to the notation, the lower limit of summation is 3 and the upper limit is 7. So we need to find the sum of 
from  to  We find the terms of the series by substituting  and  into the function  We add the 
terms to find the sum. 

 TRY IT #1 Evaluate 

Using the Formula for Arithmetic Series 
Just as we studied special types of sequences, we will look at special types of series. Recall that an arithmetic sequence is 
a sequence in which the difference between any two consecutive terms is the common difference,  The sum of the 
terms of an arithmetic sequence is called an arithmetic series. We can write the sum of the first  terms of an 
arithmetic series as: 

We can also reverse the order of the terms and write the sum as 

If we add these two expressions for the sum of the first  terms of an arithmetic series, we can derive a formula for the 



1232     13 • Sequences, Probability, and Counting Theory

sum of the first  terms of any arithmetic series. 

Because there are  terms in the series, we can simplify this sum to 

We divide by 2 to find the formula for the sum of the first  terms of an arithmetic series. 

Formula for the Sum of the First n Terms of an Arithmetic Series 

An arithmetic series is the sum of the terms of an arithmetic sequence. The formula for the sum of the first  terms 
of an arithmetic sequence is 

...
HOW TO 

Given terms of an arithmetic series, find the sum of the first  terms. 

1. Identify  and 
2. Determine 
3. Substitute values for  and  into the formula 
4. Simplify to find 

EXAMPLE 2 

Finding the First n Terms of an Arithmetic Series 
Find the sum of each arithmetic series. 

ⓐ   ⓑ   ⓒ  

Solution 
ⓐ 
We are given  and 
Count the number of terms in the sequence to find 
Substitute values for  and  into the formula and simplify. 

Access for free at openstax.org



13.4 • Series and Their Notations     1233

ⓑ 
We are given  and 
Use the formula for the general term of an arithmetic sequence to find 

Substitute values for  into the formula and simplify. 

ⓒ 
To find  substitute  into the given explicit formula. 

We are given that  To find  substitute  into the given explicit formula. 

Substitute values for  and  into the formula and simplify. 

Use the formula to find the sum of each arithmetic series. 

 TRY IT #2 

 TRY IT #3 

 TRY IT #4 

EXAMPLE 3 

Solving Application Problems with Arithmetic Series 
On the Sunday after a minor surgery, a woman is able to walk a half-mile. Each Sunday, she walks an additional quarter-
mile. After 8 weeks, what will be the total number of miles she has walked? 

Solution 
This problem can be modeled by an arithmetic series with  and  We are looking for the total number of 
miles walked after 8 weeks, so we know that  and we are looking for  To find  we can use the explicit formula 
for an arithmetic sequence. 



1234     13 • Sequences, Probability, and Counting Theory

We can now use the formula for arithmetic series. 

She will have walked a total of 11 miles. 

 TRY IT #5 A man earns $100 in the first week of June. Each week, he earns $12.50 more than the previous 
week. After 12 weeks, how much has he earned? 

Using the Formula for Geometric Series 
Just as the sum of the terms of an arithmetic sequence is called an arithmetic series, the sum of the terms in a geometric 
sequence is called a geometric series. Recall that a geometric sequence is a sequence in which the ratio of any two 
consecutive terms is the common ratio,  We can write the sum of the first  terms of a geometric series as 

Just as with arithmetic series, we can do some algebraic manipulation to derive a formula for the sum of the first  terms 
of a geometric series. We will begin by multiplying both sides of the equation by 

Next, we subtract this equation from the original equation. 

Notice that when we subtract, all but the first term of the top equation and the last term of the bottom equation cancel 
out. To obtain a formula for  divide both sides by 

Formula for the Sum of the First n Terms of a Geometric Series 

A geometric series is the sum of the terms in a geometric sequence. The formula for the sum of the first  terms of a 
geometric sequence is represented as 

...
HOW TO 

Given a geometric series, find the sum of the first n terms. 
1. Identify 
2. Substitute values for  and  into the formula 
3. Simplify to find 

Access for free at openstax.org



13.4 • Series and Their Notations     1235

EXAMPLE 4 

Finding the First n Terms of a Geometric Series 
Use the formula to find the indicated partial sum of each geometric series. 

ⓐ   for the series  ⓑ  ​

Solution 
ⓐ 

 and we are given that 
We can find  by dividing the second term of the series by the first. 

Substitute values for  into the formula and simplify. 

ⓑ 
Find  by substituting  into the given explicit formula. 

We can see from the given explicit formula that  The upper limit of summation is 6, so 
Substitute values for  and  into the formula, and simplify. 

Use the formula to find the indicated partial sum of each geometric series. 

 TRY IT #6  for the series 

 TRY IT #7 

EXAMPLE 5 

Solving an Application Problem with a Geometric Series 
At a new job, an employee’s starting salary is $26,750. He receives a 1.6% annual raise. Find his total earnings at the end 
of 5 years. 

Solution 
The problem can be represented by a geometric series with   and  Substitute values for 

 and  into the formula and simplify to find the total amount earned at the end of 5 years. 

He will have earned a total of $138,099.03 by the end of 5 years. 



1236     13 • Sequences, Probability, and Counting Theory

 TRY IT #8 At a new job, an employee’s starting salary is $32,100. She receives a 2% annual raise. How much 
will she have earned by the end of 8 years? 

Using the Formula for the Sum of an Infinite Geometric Series 
Thus far, we have looked only at finite series. Sometimes, however, we are interested in the sum of the terms of an 
infinite sequence rather than the sum of only the first  terms. An infinite series is the sum of the terms of an infinite 
sequence. An example of an infinite series is 

∞
This series can also be written in summation notation as  where the upper limit of summation is infinity. Because 

the terms are not tending to zero, the sum of the series increases without bound as we add more terms. Therefore, the 
sum of this infinite series is not defined. When the sum is not a real number, we say the series diverges. 

Determining Whether the Sum of an Infinite Geometric Series is Defined 
If the terms of an infinite geometric sequence approach 0, the sum of an infinite geometric series can be defined. The 
terms in this series approach 0: 

The common ratio  As  gets very large, the values of  get very small and approach 0. Each successive term 
affects the sum less than the preceding term. As each succeeding term gets closer to 0, the sum of the terms 
approaches a finite value. The terms of any infinite geometric series with  approach 0; the sum of a geometric 
series is defined when 

Determining Whether the Sum of an Infinite Geometric Series is Defined 

The sum of an infinite series is defined if the series is geometric and 

...
HOW TO 

Given the first several terms of an infinite series, determine if the sum of the series exists. 

1. Find the ratio of the second term to the first term. 
2. Find the ratio of the third term to the second term. 
3. Continue this process to ensure the ratio of a term to the preceding term is constant throughout. If so, the series 

is geometric. 
4. If a common ratio,  was found in step 3, check to see if  . If so, the sum is defined. If not, the sum is 

not defined. 

EXAMPLE 6 

Determining Whether the Sum of an Infinite Series is Defined 
Determine whether the sum of each infinite series is defined. 

∞
∞

ⓐ   ⓑ   ⓒ   ⓓ  

Solution 
ⓐ The ratio of the second term to the first is  which is not the same as the ratio of the third term to the second, 
The series is not geometric. 
ⓑ The ratio of the second term to the first is the same as the ratio of the third term to the second. The series is 
geometric with a common ratio of  The sum of the infinite series is defined. 

Access for free at openstax.org



13.4 • Series and Their Notations     1237

ⓒ The given formula is exponential with a base of  the series is geometric with a common ratio of  The sum of 
the infinite series is defined. 
ⓓ The given formula is not exponential; the series is not geometric because the terms are increasing, and so cannot 
yield a finite sum. 

Determine whether the sum of the infinite series is defined. 

 TRY IT #9 

 TRY IT #10 

∞
 TRY IT #11 

Finding Sums of Infinite Series 
When the sum of an infinite geometric series exists, we can calculate the sum. The formula for the sum of an infinite 
series is related to the formula for the sum of the first  terms of a geometric series. 

We will examine an infinite series with  What happens to  as  increases? 

The value of  decreases rapidly. What happens for greater values of 

As  gets very large,  gets very small. We say that, as  increases without bound,  approaches 0. As  approaches 0, 
 approaches 1. When this happens, the numerator approaches  This give us a formula for the sum of an infinite 

geometric series. 

Formula for the Sum of an Infinite Geometric Series 

The formula for the sum of an infinite geometric series with  is 

...
HOW TO 

Given an infinite geometric series, find its sum. 

1. Identify  and 
2. Confirm that 
3. Substitute values for  and  into the formula, 
4. Simplify to find 



1238     13 • Sequences, Probability, and Counting Theory

EXAMPLE 7 

Finding the Sum of an Infinite Geometric Series 
Find the sum, if it exists, for the following: 

∞
ⓐ   ⓑ   ⓒ  

∞
ⓓ  

Solution 
ⓐ There is not a constant ratio; the series is not geometric. 
ⓑ 
There is a constant ratio; the series is geometric.  and  so the sum exists. Substitute 

 and  into the formula and simplify to find the sum: 

ⓒ 
The formula is exponential, so the series is geometric with  Find  by substituting  into the given explicit 
formula: 

Substitute  and  into the formula, and simplify to find the sum: 

ⓓ The formula is exponential, so the series is geometric, but  The sum does not exist. 

EXAMPLE 8 

Finding an Equivalent Fraction for a Repeating Decimal 
Find an equivalent fraction for the repeating decimal 

Solution 
We notice the repeating decimal  so we can rewrite the repeating decimal as a sum of terms. 

Looking for a pattern, we rewrite the sum, noticing that we see the first term multiplied to 0.1 in the second term, and 
the second term multiplied to 0.1 in the third term. 

Notice the pattern; we multiply each consecutive term by a common ratio of 0.1 starting with the first term of 0.3. So, 
substituting into our formula for an infinite geometric sum, we have 

Find the sum, if it exists. 

 TRY IT #12 

Access for free at openstax.org



13.4 • Series and Their Notations     1239

∞
 TRY IT #13 

∞
 TRY IT #14 

Solving Annuity Problems 
At the beginning of the section, we looked at a problem in which a parent invested a set amount of money each month 
into a college fund for six years. An annuity is an investment in which the purchaser makes a sequence of periodic, 
equal payments. To find the amount of an annuity, we need to find the sum of all the payments and the interest earned. 
In the example, the parent invests $50 each month. This is the value of the initial deposit. The account paid 6% annual 
interest, compounded monthly. To find the interest rate per payment period, we need to divide the 6% annual 
percentage interest (APR) rate by 12. So the monthly interest rate is 0.5%. We can multiply the amount in the account 
each month by 100.5% to find the value of the account after interest has been added. 
We can find the value of the annuity right after the last deposit by using a geometric series with  and 

 After the first deposit, the value of the annuity will be $50. Let us see if we can determine the 
amount in the college fund and the interest earned. 
We can find the value of the annuity after  deposits using the formula for the sum of the first  terms of a geometric 
series. In 6 years, there are 72 months, so  We can substitute  into the formula, 
and simplify to find the value of the annuity after 6 years. 

After the last deposit, the parent will have a total of $4,320.44 in the account. Notice, the parent made 72 payments of 
$50 each for a total of  This means that because of the annuity, the parent earned $720.44 interest in 
their college fund. 

...
HOW TO 

Given an initial deposit and an interest rate, find the value of an annuity. 

1. Determine  the value of the initial deposit. 
2. Determine  the number of deposits. 
3. Determine 

a. Divide the annual interest rate by the number of times per year that interest is compounded. 
b. Add 1 to this amount to find 

4. Substitute values for  into the formula for the sum of the first  terms of a geometric series, 

5. Simplify to find  the value of the annuity after  deposits. 

EXAMPLE 9 

Solving an Annuity Problem 
A deposit of $100 is placed into a college fund at the beginning of every month for 10 years. The fund earns 9% annual 
interest, compounded monthly, and paid at the end of the month. How much is in the account right after the last 
deposit? 

Solution 
The value of the initial deposit is $100, so  A total of 120 monthly deposits are made in the 10 years, so 



1240     13 • Sequences, Probability, and Counting Theory

 To find  divide the annual interest rate by 12 to find the monthly interest rate and add 1 to represent the new 
monthly deposit. 

Substitute  into the formula for the sum of the first  terms of a geometric series, 
and simplify to find the value of the annuity. 

So the account has $19,351.43 after the last deposit is made. 

 TRY IT #15 At the beginning of each month, $200 is deposited into a retirement fund. The fund earns 6% 
annual interest, compounded monthly, and paid into the account at the end of the month. How 
much is in the account if deposits are made for 10 years? 

 MEDIA 

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with series. 

Arithmetic Series (https://openstax.org/l/arithmeticser) 
Geometric Series (https://openstax.org/l/geometricser) 
Summation Notation (https://openstax.org/l/sumnotation) 

 13.4 SECTION EXERCISES 
Verbal 

1 . What is an  partial sum?  2 . What is the difference  3 . What is a geometric series? 
between an arithmetic 
sequence and an arithmetic 
series? 

4 . How is finding the sum of an  5 . What is an annuity? 
infinite geometric series 
different from finding the 

 partial sum? 

Algebraic 

For the following exercises, express each description of a sum using summation notation. 

6 . The sum of terms  7 . The sum from of  to  8 . The sum of  from 
from  to  of  to 

9 . The sum that results from 
adding the number 4 five 
times 

For the following exercises, express each arithmetic sum using summation notation. 
10 .  11 . 

12 . 

For the following exercises, use the formula for the sum of the first  terms of each arithmetic sequence. 

13 .  14 .  15 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



13.4 • Series and Their Notations     1241

For the following exercises, express each geometric sum using summation notation. 
16 .  17 . 

18 . 

For the following exercises, use the formula for the sum of the first  terms of each geometric sequence, and then state 
the indicated sum. 

19 .  20 .  21 . 

For the following exercises, determine whether the infinite series has a sum. If so, write the formula for the sum. If not, 
state the reason. 

∞
22 .  23 .  24 . 

​
25 . ∞

Graphical 

For the following exercises, use the following scenario. Javier makes monthly deposits into a savings account. He opened 
the account with an initial deposit of $50. Each month thereafter he increased the previous deposit amount by $20. 
26 . Graph the arithmetic  27 . Graph the arithmetic series 

sequence showing one showing the monthly sums 
year of Javier’s deposits. of one year of Javier’s 

deposits. 

∞
For the following exercises, use the geometric series 

28 . Graph the first 7 partial  29 . What number does 
sums of the series. seem to be approaching in 

the graph? Find the sum to 
explain why this makes 
sense. 

Numeric 

For the following exercises, find the indicated sum. 

30 .  31 .  32 . 

33 . 

For the following exercises, use the formula for the sum of the first  terms of an arithmetic series to find the sum. 

34 .  35 . 



1242     13 • Sequences, Probability, and Counting Theory

36 .  37 . 

For the following exercises, use the formula for the sum of the first  terms of a geometric series to find the partial sum. 

38 .  for the series  39 .  for the series  40 . 

41 . 

For the following exercises, find the sum of the infinite geometric series. 

​
42 .  43 .  44 . ∞

∞
45 . 

For the following exercises, determine the value of the annuity for the indicated monthly deposit amount, the number of 
deposits, and the interest rate. 
46 . Deposit amount:  total  47 . Deposit amount:  48 . Deposit amount: 

deposits:  interest rate: total deposits:  interest total deposits:  interest 
 compounded monthly rate:  compounded rate:  compounded 

monthly quarterly 
49 . Deposit amount: 

total deposits:  interest 
rate:  compounded 
semi-annually 

Extensions 

50 . The sum of terms  51 . Write an explicit formula  52 . Find the smallest value of n 
from  through  is for  such that such that 

 What is x? 
 Assume this 

is an arithmetic series. 
53 . How many terms must be  54 . Write  as an infinite  55 . The sum of an infinite 

added before the series geometric series using geometric series is five 
 has a summation notation. Then times the value of the first 

sum less than use the formula for finding term. What is the common 
the sum of an infinite ratio of the series? 
geometric series to convert 

 to a fraction. 

Access for free at openstax.org



13.5 • Counting Principles     1243

56 . To get the best loan rates  57 . Karl has two years to save 
available, the Coleman  to buy a used car 
family want to save when he graduates. To the 
enough money to place nearest dollar, what would 
20% down on a $160,000 his monthly deposits need 
home. They plan to make to be if he invests in an 
monthly deposits of $125 account offering a 4.2% 
in an investment account annual interest rate that 
that offers 8.5% annual compounds monthly? 
interest compounded 
semi-annually. Will the 
Colemans have enough for 
a 20% down payment after 
five years of saving? How 
much money will they have 
saved? 

Real-World Applications 

58 . Keisha devised a week-long  59 . A boulder rolled down a  60 . A scientist places 50 cells in 
study plan to prepare for mountain, traveling 6 feet a petri dish. Every hour, the 
finals. On the first day, she in the first second. Each population increases by 
plans to study for  hour, successive second, its 1.5%. What will the cell 
and each successive day distance increased by 8 count be after 1 day? 
she will increase her study feet. How far did the 
time by  minutes. How boulder travel after 10 
many hours will Keisha seconds? 
have studied after one 
week? 

61 . A pendulum travels a  62 . Rachael deposits $1,500 
distance of 3 feet on its into a retirement fund each 
first swing. On each year. The fund earns 8.2% 
successive swing, it travels annual interest, 

 the distance of the compounded monthly. If 
previous swing. What is the she opened her account 
total distance traveled by when she was 19 years old, 
the pendulum when it how much will she have by 
stops swinging? the time she is 55? How 

much of that amount will 
be interest earned? 

13.5 Counting Principles 
Learning Objectives 
In this section, you will: 

Solve counting problems using the Addition Principle. 
Solve counting problems using the Multiplication Principle. 
Solve counting problems using permutations involving n distinct objects. 
Solve counting problems using combinations. 
Find the number of subsets of a given set. 
Solve counting problems using permutations involving n non-distinct objects. 

A new company sells customizable cases for tablets and smartphones. Each case comes in a variety of colors and can be 
personalized for an additional fee with images or a monogram. A customer can choose not to personalize or could 
choose to have one, two, or three images or a monogram. The customer can choose the order of the images and the 
letters in the monogram. The company is working with an agency to develop a marketing campaign with a focus on the 
huge number of options they offer. Counting the possibilities is challenging! 
We encounter a wide variety of counting problems every day. There is a branch of mathematics devoted to the study of 



1244     13 • Sequences, Probability, and Counting Theory

counting problems such as this one. Other applications of counting include secure passwords, horse racing outcomes, 
and college scheduling choices. We will examine this type of mathematics in this section. 

Using the Addition Principle 
The company that sells customizable cases offers cases for tablets and smartphones. There are 3 supported tablet 
models and 5 supported smartphone models. The Addition Principle tells us that we can add the number of tablet 
options to the number of smartphone options to find the total number of options. By the Addition Principle, there are 8 
total options, as we can see in Figure 1. 

Figure 1 

The Addition Principle 

According to the Addition Principle, if one event can occur in  ways and a second event with no common outcomes 
can occur in  ways, then the first or second event can occur in  ways. 

EXAMPLE 1 

Using the Addition Principle 
There are 2 vegetarian entrée options and 5 meat entrée options on a dinner menu. What is the total number of entrée 
options? 

Solution 
We can add the number of vegetarian options to the number of meat options to find the total number of entrée options. 

There are 7 total options. 

 TRY IT #1 A student is shopping for a new computer. He is deciding among 3 desktop computers and 4 
laptop computers. What is the total number of computer options? 

Using the Multiplication Principle 
The Multiplication Principle applies when we are making more than one selection. Suppose we are choosing an 
appetizer, an entrée, and a dessert. If there are 2 appetizer options, 3 entrée options, and 2 dessert options on a fixed-
price dinner menu, there are a total of 12 possible choices of one each as shown in the tree diagram in Figure 2. 

Access for free at openstax.org



13.5 • Counting Principles     1245

Figure 2 
The possible choices are: 
1. soup, chicken, cake 
2. soup, chicken, pudding 
3. soup, fish, cake 
4. soup, fish, pudding 
5. soup, steak, cake 
6. soup, steak, pudding 
7. salad, chicken, cake 
8. salad, chicken, pudding 
9. salad, fish, cake 

10. salad, fish, pudding 
11. salad, steak, cake 
12. salad, steak, pudding 
We can also find the total number of possible dinners by multiplying. 
We could also conclude that there are 12 possible dinner choices simply by applying the Multiplication Principle. 

The Multiplication Principle 

According to the Multiplication Principle, if one event can occur in  ways and a second event can occur in  ways 
after the first event has occurred, then the two events can occur in  ways. This is also known as the 
Fundamental Counting Principle. 

EXAMPLE 2 

Using the Multiplication Principle 
Diane packed 2 skirts, 4 blouses, and a sweater for her business trip. She will need to choose a skirt and a blouse for 
each outfit and decide whether to wear the sweater. Use the Multiplication Principle to find the total number of possible 
outfits. 

Solution 
To find the total number of outfits, find the product of the number of skirt options, the number of blouse options, and 
the number of sweater options. 

There are 16 possible outfits. 



1246     13 • Sequences, Probability, and Counting Theory

 TRY IT #2 A restaurant offers a breakfast special that includes a breakfast sandwich, a side dish, and a 
beverage. There are 3 types of breakfast sandwiches, 4 side dish options, and 5 beverage choices. 
Find the total number of possible breakfast specials. 

Finding the Number of Permutations of n Distinct Objects 
The Multiplication Principle can be used to solve a variety of problem types. One type of problem involves placing objects 
in order. We arrange letters into words and digits into numbers, line up for photographs, decorate rooms, and more. An 
ordering of objects is called a permutation. 

Finding the Number of Permutations of n Distinct Objects Using the Multiplication Principle 
To solve permutation problems, it is often helpful to draw line segments for each option. That enables us to determine 
the number of each option so we can multiply. For instance, suppose we have four paintings, and we want to find the 
number of ways we can hang three of the paintings in order on the wall. We can draw three lines to represent the three 
places on the wall. 

There are four options for the first place, so we write a 4 on the first line. 

After the first place has been filled, there are three options for the second place so we write a 3 on the second line. 

After the second place has been filled, there are two options for the third place so we write a 2 on the third line. Finally, 
we find the product. 

There are 24 possible permutations of the paintings. 
...

HOW TO 

Given  distinct options, determine how many permutations there are. 

1. Determine how many options there are for the first situation. 
2. Determine how many options are left for the second situation. 
3. Continue until all of the spots are filled. 
4. Multiply the numbers together. 

EXAMPLE 3 

Finding the Number of Permutations Using the Multiplication Principle 
At a swimming competition, nine swimmers compete in a race. 

ⓐ How many ways can they place first, second, and third? 
ⓑ How many ways can they place first, second, and third if a swimmer named Ariel wins first place? (Assume there is 
only one contestant named Ariel.) 
ⓒ How many ways can all nine swimmers line up for a photo? 

Solution 
ⓐ Draw lines for each place. 

There are 9 options for first place. Once someone has won first place, there are 8 remaining options for second place. 
Once first and second place have been won, there are 7 remaining options for third place. 

Multiply to find that there are 504 ways for the swimmers to place. 

Access for free at openstax.org



13.5 • Counting Principles     1247

ⓑ Draw lines for describing each place. 

We know Ariel must win first place, so there is only 1 option for first place. There are 8 remaining options for second 
place, and then 7 remaining options for third place. 

Multiply to find that there are 56 ways for the swimmers to place if Ariel wins first. 

ⓒ 
Draw lines for describing each place in the photo. 

There are 9 choices for the first spot, then 8 for the second, 7 for the third, 6 for the fourth, and so on until only 1 
person remains for the last spot. 

There are 362,880 possible permutations for the swimmers to line up. 

Analysis 
Note that in part c, we found there were 9! ways for 9 people to line up. The number of permutations of  distinct objects 
can always be found by 

A family of five is having portraits taken. Use the Multiplication Principle to find the following. 

 TRY IT #3 How many ways can the family line up for the portrait? 

 TRY IT #4 How many ways can the photographer line up 3 family members? 

 TRY IT #5 How many ways can the family line up for the portrait if the parents are required to stand on each 
end? 

Finding the Number of Permutations of n Distinct Objects Using a Formula 
For some permutation problems, it is inconvenient to use the Multiplication Principle because there are so many 
numbers to multiply. Fortunately, we can solve these problems using a formula. Before we learn the formula, let’s look at 
two common notations for permutations. If we have a set of  objects and we want to choose  objects from the set in 
order, we write  Another way to write this is  a notation commonly seen on computers and calculators. To 
calculate  we begin by finding  the number of ways to line up all  objects. We then divide by  to cancel 
out the  items that we do not wish to line up. 
Let’s see how this works with a simple example. Imagine a club of six people. They need to elect a president, a vice 
president, and a treasurer. Six people can be elected president, any one of the five remaining people can be elected vice 
president, and any of the remaining four people could be elected treasurer. The number of ways this may be done is 

 Using factorials, we get the same result. 

There are 120 ways to select 3 officers in order from a club with 6 members. We refer to this as a permutation of 6 taken 
3 at a time. The general formula is as follows. 

Note that the formula stills works if we are choosing all  objects and placing them in order. In that case we would be 
dividing by  or  which we said earlier is equal to 1. So the number of permutations of  objects taken  at a 
time is  or just 



1248     13 • Sequences, Probability, and Counting Theory

Formula for Permutations of n Distinct Objects 

Given  distinct objects, the number of ways to select  objects from the set in order is 

...
HOW TO 

Given a word problem, evaluate the possible permutations. 

1. Identify  from the given information. 
2. Identify  from the given information. 
3. Replace  and  in the formula with the given values. 
4. Evaluate. 

EXAMPLE 4 

Finding the Number of Permutations Using the Formula 
A professor is creating an exam of 9 questions from a test bank of 12 questions. How many ways can she select and 
arrange the questions? 

Solution 
Substitute  and  into the permutation formula and simplify. 

There are 79,833,600 possible permutations of exam questions! 

Analysis 
We can also use a calculator to find permutations. For this problem, we would enter 12, press the  function, enter 9, 
and then press the equal sign. The  function may be located under the MATH menu with probability commands. 

 Q&A Could we have solved Example 4 using the Multiplication Principle? 

Yes. We could have multiplied  to find the same answer. 

A play has a cast of 7 actors preparing to make their curtain call. Use the permutation formula to find the following. 

 TRY IT #6 How many ways can the 7 actors line up? 

 TRY IT #7 How many ways can 5 of the 7 actors be chosen to line up? 

Find the Number of Combinations Using the Formula 
So far, we have looked at problems asking us to put objects in order. There are many problems in which we want to select 
a few objects from a group of objects, but we do not care about the order. When we are selecting objects and the order 
does not matter, we are dealing with combinations. A selection of  objects from a set of  objects where the order does 
not matter can be written as  Just as with permutations,  can also be written as  In this case, the 
general formula is as follows. 

Access for free at openstax.org



13.5 • Counting Principles     1249

An earlier problem considered choosing 3 of 4 possible paintings to hang on a wall. We found that there were 24 ways to 
select 3 of the 4 paintings in order. But what if we did not care about the order? We would expect a smaller number 
because selecting paintings 1, 2, 3 would be the same as selecting paintings 2, 3, 1. To find the number of ways to select 
3 of the 4 paintings, disregarding the order of the paintings, divide the number of permutations by the number of ways 
to order 3 paintings. There are  ways to order 3 paintings. There are  or 4 ways to select 3 of the 4 
paintings. This number makes sense because every time we are selecting 3 paintings, we are not selecting 1 painting. 
There are 4 paintings we could choose not to select, so there are 4 ways to select 3 of the 4 paintings. 

Formula for Combinations of n Distinct Objects 

Given  distinct objects, the number of ways to select  objects from the set is 

...
HOW TO 

Given a number of options, determine the possible number of combinations. 

1. Identify  from the given information. 
2. Identify  from the given information. 
3. Replace  and  in the formula with the given values. 
4. Evaluate. 

EXAMPLE 5 

Finding the Number of Combinations Using the Formula 
A fast food restaurant offers five side dish options. Your meal comes with two side dishes. 

ⓐ How many ways can you select your side dishes?  ⓑ How many ways can you select 3 side dishes? 
Solution 

ⓐ We want to choose 2 side dishes from 5 options.  ⓑ We want to choose 3 side dishes from 5 options. 

Analysis 
We can also use a graphing calculator to find combinations. Enter 5, then press  enter 3, and then press the equal 
sign. The  function may be located under the MATH menu with probability commands. 

 Q&A Is it a coincidence that parts (a) and (b) in Example 5 have the same answers? 

No. When we choose r objects from n objects, we are not choosing  objects. Therefore, 

 TRY IT #8 An ice cream shop offers 10 flavors of ice cream. How many ways are there to choose 3 flavors for 
a banana split? 

Finding the Number of Subsets of a Set 
We have looked only at combination problems in which we chose exactly  objects. In some problems, we want to 
consider choosing every possible number of objects. Consider, for example, a pizza restaurant that offers 5 toppings. Any 
number of toppings can be ordered. How many different pizzas are possible? 
To answer this question, we need to consider pizzas with any number of toppings. There is  way to order a 
pizza with no toppings. There are  ways to order a pizza with exactly one topping. If we continue this process, 



1250     13 • Sequences, Probability, and Counting Theory

we get 

There are 32 possible pizzas. This result is equal to 
We are presented with a sequence of choices. For each of the  objects we have two choices: include it in the subset or 
not. So for the whole subset we have made  choices, each with two options. So there are a total of 
possible resulting subsets, all the way from the empty subset, which we obtain when we say “no” each time, to the 
original set itself, which we obtain when we say “yes” each time. 

Formula for the Number of Subsets of a Set 

A set containing n distinct objects has  subsets. 

EXAMPLE 6 

Finding the Number of Subsets of a Set 
A restaurant offers butter, cheese, chives, and sour cream as toppings for a baked potato. How many different ways are 
there to order a potato? 

Solution 
We are looking for the number of subsets of a set with 4 objects. Substitute  into the formula. 

There are 16 possible ways to order a potato. 

 TRY IT #9 A sundae bar at a wedding has 6 toppings to choose from. Any number of toppings can be 
chosen. How many different sundaes are possible? 

Finding the Number of Permutations of n Non-Distinct Objects 
We have studied permutations where all of the objects involved were distinct. What happens if some of the objects are 
indistinguishable? For example, suppose there is a sheet of 12 stickers. If all of the stickers were distinct, there would be 

 ways to order the stickers. However, 4 of the stickers are identical stars, and 3 are identical moons. Because all of the 
objects are not distinct, many of the  permutations we counted are duplicates. The general formula for this situation 
is as follows. 

In this example, we need to divide by the number of ways to order the 4 stars and the ways to order the 3 moons to find 
the number of unique permutations of the stickers. There are  ways to order the stars and  ways to order the moon. 

There are 3,326,400 ways to order the sheet of stickers. 

Formula for Finding the Number of Permutations of n Non-Distinct Objects 

If there are  elements in a set and  are alike,  are alike,  are alike, and so on through  the number of 
permutations can be found by 

Access for free at openstax.org



13.5 • Counting Principles     1251

EXAMPLE 7 

Finding the Number of Permutations of n Non-Distinct Objects 
Find the number of rearrangements of the letters in the word DISTINCT. 

Solution 
There are 8 letters. Both I and T are repeated 2 times. Substitute  and  into the formula. 

There are 10,080 arrangements. 

 TRY IT #10 Find the number of rearrangements of the letters in the word CARRIER. 

 MEDIA 

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with combinations and permutations. 

Combinations (https://openstax.org/l/combinations) 
Permutations (https://openstax.org/l/permutations) 

 13.5 SECTION EXERCISES 
Verbal 

For the following exercises, assume that there are  ways an event  can happen,  ways an event  can happen, and 
that  are non-overlapping. 
1 . Use the Addition Principle of  2 . Use the Multiplication 

counting to explain how Principle of counting to 
many ways event explain how many ways 
can occur. event  can occur. 

Answer the following questions. 
3 . When given two separate  4 . Describe how the  5 . What is the term for the 

events, how do we know permutation of  objects arrangement that selects 
whether to apply the differs from the objects from a set of 
Addition Principle or the permutation of choosing objects when the order of 
Multiplication Principle objects from a set of the  objects is not 
when calculating possible objects. Include how each is important? What is the 
outcomes? What calculated. formula for calculating the 
conjunctions may help to number of possible 
determine which operations outcomes for this type of 
to use? arrangement? 

Numeric 

For the following exercises, determine whether to use the Addition Principle or the Multiplication Principle. Then perform 
the calculations. 
6 . Let the set  7. Let the set 

How many ways are there to choose a positive or 
How many ways are there to an odd number from 
choose a negative or an even 
number from 



1252     13 • Sequences, Probability, and Counting Theory

8 . How many ways are there to  9 . How many ways are there to  10 . How many outcomes are 
pick a red ace or a club from pick a paint color from 5 possible from tossing a 
a standard card playing shades of green, 4 shades of pair of coins? 
deck? blue, or 7 shades of yellow? 

11 . How many outcomes are  12 . How many two-letter  13 . How many ways are there 
possible from tossing a strings—the first letter to construct a string of 3 
coin and rolling a 6-sided from  and the second digits if numbers can be 
die? letter from  can be repeated? 

formed from the sets 
 and 

14 . How many ways are there 
to construct a string of 3 
digits if numbers cannot be 
repeated? 

For the following exercises, compute the value of the expression. 
15 .  16 .  17 . 
18 .  19 .  20 . 
21 .  22 .  23 . 
24 . 

For the following exercises, find the number of subsets in each given set. 
25 .  26 .  27 . A set containing 5 distinct 

numbers, 4 distinct letters, 
and 3 distinct symbols 

28 . The set of even numbers  29 . The set of two-digit 
from 2 to 28 numbers between 1 and 

100 containing the digit 0 

For the following exercises, find the distinct number of arrangements. 
30 . The letters in the word  31 . The letters in the word  32 . The letters in the word 

“juggernaut” “academia” “academia” that begin and 
end in “a” 

33 . The symbols in the string  34 . The symbols in the string 
#,#,#,@,@,$,$,$,%,%,%,% #,#,#,@,@,$,$,$,%,%,%,% 

that begin and end with 
“%” 

Extensions 

35 . The set,  consists of  36 . The number of 5-element  37 . Can  ever equal 
 whole subsets from a set  Explain. 

numbers, each being the containing  elements is 
same number of digits equal to the number of 
long. How many digits long 6-element subsets from 
is a number from  (Hint: the same set. What is the 
use the fact that a whole value of  (Hint: the order 
number cannot start with in which the elements for 
the digit 0.) the subsets are chosen is 

not important.) 

Access for free at openstax.org



13.5 • Counting Principles     1253

38 . Suppose a set  has 2,048  39 . How many arrangements 
subsets. How many distinct can be made from the 
objects are contained in letters of the word 

“mountains” if all the 
vowels must form a string? 

Real-World Applications 

40 . A family consisting of 2  41 . A cell phone company  42 . In horse racing, a “trifecta” 
parents and 3 children is to offers 6 different voice occurs when a bettor wins 
pose for a picture with 2 packages and 8 different by selecting the first three 
family members in the data packages. Of those, 3 finishers in the exact order 
front and 3 in the back. packages include both (1st place, 2nd place, and 
ⓐ How many voice and data. How many 3rd place). How many 
arrangements are possible ways are there to choose different trifectas are 
with no restrictions? either voice or data, but possible if there are 14 
ⓑ How many not both? horses in a race? 
arrangements are possible 
if the parents must sit in 
the front? 
ⓒ How many 
arrangements are possible 
if the parents must be next 
to each other? 

43 . A wholesale T-shirt  44 . Hector wants to place  45 . An art store has 4 brands 
company offers sizes small, billboard advertisements of paint pens in 12 
medium, large, and extra- throughout the county for different colors and 3 types 
large in organic or non- his new business. How of ink. How many paint 
organic cotton and colors many ways can Hector pens are there to choose 
white, black, gray, blue, choose 15 neighborhoods from? 
and red. How many to advertise in if there are 
different T-shirts are there 30 neighborhoods in the 
to choose from? county? 

46 . How many ways can a  47 . How many ways can a  48 . A conductor needs 5 
committee of 3 freshmen baseball coach arrange the cellists and 5 violinists to 
and 4 juniors be formed order of 9 batters if there play at a diplomatic event. 
from a group of are 15 players on the To do this, he ranks the 
freshmen and  juniors? team? orchestra’s 10 cellists and 

16 violinists in order of 
musical proficiency. What 
is the ratio of the total 
cellist rankings possible to 
the total violinist rankings 
possible? 

49 . A motorcycle shop has 10  50 . A skateboard shop stocks  51 . Just-For-Kicks Sneaker 
choppers, 6 bobbers, and 5 10 types of board decks, 3 Company offers an online 
café racers—different types of trucks, and 4 types customizing service. How 
types of vintage of wheels. How many many ways are there to 
motorcycles. How many different skateboards can design a custom pair of 
ways can the shop choose be constructed? Just-For-Kicks sneakers if a 
3 choppers, 5 bobbers, and customer can choose from 
2 café racers for a weekend a basic shoe up to 11 
showcase? customizable options? 



1254     13 • Sequences, Probability, and Counting Theory

52 . A car wash offers the  53 . Suni bought 20 plants to  54 . How many unique ways 
following optional services arrange along the border can a string of Christmas 
to the basic wash: clear of her garden. How many lights be arranged from 9 
coat wax, triple foam distinct arrangements can red, 10 green, 6 white, and 
polish, undercarriage she make if the plants are 12 gold color bulbs? 
wash, rust inhibitor, wheel comprised of 6 tulips, 6 
brightener, air freshener, roses, and 8 daisies? 
and interior shampoo. How 
many washes are possible 
if any number of options 
can be added to the basic 
wash? 

13.6 Binomial Theorem 
Learning Objectives 
In this section, you will: 

Apply the Binomial Theorem. 
A polynomial with two terms is called a binomial. We have already learned to multiply binomials and to raise binomials to 
powers, but raising a binomial to a high power can be tedious and time-consuming. In this section, we will discuss a 
shortcut that will allow us to find  without multiplying the binomial by itself  times. 

Identifying Binomial Coefficients 
In Counting Principles, we studied combinations. In the shortcut to finding  we will need to use combinations to 
find the coefficients that will appear in the expansion of the binomial. In this case, we use the notation  instead of 

 but it can be calculated in the same way. So 

The combination  is called a binomial coefficient. An example of a binomial coefficient is 

Binomial Coefficients 

If  and  are integers greater than or equal to 0 with  then the binomial coefficient is 

 Q&A Is a binomial coefficient always a whole number? 

Yes. Just as the number of combinations must always be a whole number, a binomial coefficient will 
always be a whole number. 

EXAMPLE 1 

Finding Binomial Coefficients 
Find each binomial coefficient. 

ⓐ   ⓑ   ⓒ  

Solution 
Use the formula to calculate each binomial coefficient. You can also use the  function on your calculator. 

Access for free at openstax.org



13.6 • Binomial Theorem     1255

ⓐ   ⓑ   ⓒ  

Analysis 
Notice that we obtained the same result for parts (b) and (c). If you look closely at the solution for these two parts, you 
will see that you end up with the same two factorials in the denominator, but the order is reversed, just as with 
combinations. 

 TRY IT #1 Find each binomial coefficient. 

ⓐ   ⓑ  

Using the Binomial Theorem 
When we expand  by multiplying, the result is called a binomial expansion, and it includes binomial coefficients. 
If we wanted to expand  we might multiply  by itself fifty-two times. This could take hours! If we 
examine some simple binomial expansions, we can find patterns that will lead us to a shortcut for finding more 
complicated binomial expansions. 

First, let’s examine the exponents. With each successive term, the exponent for  decreases and the exponent for 
increases. The sum of the two exponents is  for each term. 
Next, let’s examine the coefficients. Notice that the coefficients increase and then decrease in a symmetrical pattern. The 
coefficients follow a pattern: 

These patterns lead us to the Binomial Theorem, which can be used to expand any binomial. 

Another way to see the coefficients is to examine the expansion of a binomial in general form,  to successive 
powers 1, 2, 3, and 4. 

Can you guess the next expansion for the binomial 



1256     13 • Sequences, Probability, and Counting Theory

Figure 1 
See Figure 1, which illustrates the following: 

• There are  terms in the expansion of 
• The degree (or sum of the exponents) for each term is 
• The powers on  begin with  and decrease to 0. 
• The powers on  begin with 0 and increase to 
• The coefficients are symmetric. 

To determine the expansion on  we see  thus, there will be 5+1 = 6 terms. Each term has a combined 
degree of 5. In descending order for powers of  the pattern is as follows: 

• Introduce  and then for each successive term reduce the exponent on  by 1 until  is reached. 
• Introduce  and then increase the exponent on  by 1 until  is reached. 

The next expansion would be 

But where do those coefficients come from? The binomial coefficients are symmetric. We can see these coefficients in an 
array known as Pascal's Triangle, shown in Figure 2. Pascal didn't invent the triangle. The underlying principles had been 
developed and written about for over 1500 years, first by the Indian mathematician (and poet) Pingala in the second 
century BCE. Others throughout Asia and Europe worked with the concepts throughout, and the triangle was first 
published in its graphical form by Omar Khayyam, an Iranian mathematician and astronomer, for whom the triangle is 
named in Iran. French mathematician Blaise Pascal repopularized it when he republished it and used it to solve a 
number of probability problems. 

Figure 2 
To generate Pascal’s Triangle, we start by writing a 1. In the row below, row 2, we write two 1’s. In the 3rd row, flank the 
ends of the rows with 1’s, and add  to find the middle number, 2. In the  row, flank the ends of the row with 1’s. 
Each element in the triangle is the sum of the two elements immediately above it. 
To see the connection between Pascal’s Triangle and binomial coefficients, let us revisit the expansion of the binomials in 
general form. 

Access for free at openstax.org



13.6 • Binomial Theorem     1257

The Binomial Theorem 

The Binomial Theorem is a formula that can be used to expand any binomial. 

...
HOW TO 

Given a binomial, write it in expanded form. 

1. Determine the value of  according to the exponent. 
2. Evaluate the  through  using the Binomial Theorem formula. 
3. Simplify. 

EXAMPLE 2 

Expanding a Binomial 
Write in expanded form. 

ⓐ   ⓑ  
Solution 

ⓐ Substitute  into the formula. Evaluate the  through  terms. Simplify. 

ⓑ Substitute  into the formula. Evaluate the  through  terms. Notice that  is in the place that was 
occupied by  and that  is in the place that was occupied by  So we substitute them. Simplify. 

Analysis 
Notice the alternating signs in part b. This happens because  raised to odd powers is negative, but  raised to 
even powers is positive. This will occur whenever the binomial contains a subtraction sign. 

 TRY IT #2 Write in expanded form. 

ⓐ   ⓑ  



1258     13 • Sequences, Probability, and Counting Theory

Using the Binomial Theorem to Find a Single Term 
Expanding a binomial with a high exponent such as  can be a lengthy process. 
Sometimes we are interested only in a certain term of a binomial expansion. We do not need to fully expand a binomial 
to find a single specific term. 

Note the pattern of coefficients in the expansion of 

The second term is  The third term is  We can generalize this result. 

The (r+1)th Term of a Binomial Expansion 

The  term of the binomial expansion of  is: 

...
HOW TO 

Given a binomial, write a specific term without fully expanding. 

1. Determine the value of  according to the exponent. 
2. Determine 
3. Determine 
4. Replace  in the formula for the  term of the binomial expansion. 

EXAMPLE 3 

Writing a Given Term of a Binomial Expansion 
Find the tenth term of  without fully expanding the binomial. 

Solution 
Because we are looking for the tenth term,  we will use  in our calculations. 

 TRY IT #3 Find the sixth term of  without fully expanding the binomial. 

 MEDIA 

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with binomial expansion. 

The Binomial Theorem (https://openstax.org/l/binomialtheorem) 
Binomial Theorem Example (https://openstax.org/l/btexample) 

Access for free at openstax.org



13.6 • Binomial Theorem     1259

 13.6 SECTION EXERCISES 
Verbal 

1 . What is a binomial  2 . What role do binomial  3 . What is the Binomial 
coefficient, and how it is coefficients play in a Theorem and what is its 
calculated? binomial expansion? Are use? 

they restricted to any type of 
number? 

4 . When is it an advantage to 
use the Binomial Theorem? 
Explain. 

Algebraic 

For the following exercises, evaluate the binomial coefficient. 

5 .  6 .  7 . 

8 .  9 .  10 . 

11 .  12 . 

For the following exercises, use the Binomial Theorem to expand each binomial. 

13 .  14 .  15 . 

16 .  17 .  18 . 

19 .  20 .  21 . 

22 . 

For the following exercises, use the Binomial Theorem to write the first three terms of each binomial. 

23 .  24 .  25 . 

26 .  27 .  28 . 

29 . 

For the following exercises, find the indicated term of each binomial without fully expanding the binomial. 
30 . The fourth term of  31 . The fourth term of  32 . The third term of 

33 . The eighth term of  34 . The seventh term of  35 . The fifth term of 

36 . The tenth term of  37 . The ninth term of  38 . The fourth term of 

39 . The eighth term of 



1260     13 • Sequences, Probability, and Counting Theory

Graphical 

For the following exercises, use the Binomial Theorem to expand the binomial  Then find and graph 
each indicated sum on one set of axes. 
40 . Find and graph  such  41 . Find and graph  such 42 . Find and graph  such 

that  is the first term that  is the sum of the that  is the sum of the 
of the expansion. first two terms of the first three terms of the 

expansion. expansion. 
43 . Find and graph  such 44 . Find and graph  such 

that  is the sum of the that  is the sum of the 
first four terms of the first five terms of the 
expansion. expansion. 

Extensions 

45 . In the expansion of  each term has the  46 . In the expansion of 
form , where  successively takes on  the coefficient of 

 is the same as the 
coefficient of which other 

the value  If  what is term? 
the corresponding term? 

47 . Consider the expansion of  48 . Find 49 . Which expression cannot 
 What is the be expanded using the 

exponent of  in the and write the answer as a Binomial Theorem? 
term? binomial coefficient in the Explain. 

form  Prove it. 

Hint: Use the fact that, for 
any integer  such that 

13.7 Probability 
Learning Objectives 
In this section, you will: 

Construct probability models. 
Compute probabilities of equally likely outcomes. 
Compute probabilities of the union of two events. 
Use the complement rule to find probabilities. 
Compute probability using counting theory. 

Access for free at openstax.org



13.7 • Probability     1261

Figure 1 An example of a “spaghetti model,” which can be used to predict possible paths of a tropical storm.1 

Residents of the Southeastern United States are all too familiar with charts, known as spaghetti models, such as the one 
in Figure 1. They combine a collection of weather data to predict the most likely path of a hurricane. Each colored line 
represents one possible path. The group of squiggly lines can begin to resemble strands of spaghetti, hence the name. 
In this section, we will investigate methods for making these types of predictions. 

Constructing Probability Models 
Suppose we roll a six-sided number cube. Rolling a number cube is an example of an experiment, or an activity with an 
observable result. The numbers on the cube are possible results, or outcomes, of this experiment. The set of all possible 
outcomes of an experiment is called the sample space of the experiment. The sample space for this experiment is 

 An event is any subset of a sample space. 
The likelihood of an event is known as probability. The probability of an event  is a number that always satisfies 

 where 0 indicates an impossible event and 1 indicates a certain event. A probability model is a mathematical 
description of an experiment listing all possible outcomes and their associated probabilities. For instance, if there is a 1% 
chance of winning a raffle and a 99% chance of losing the raffle, a probability model would look much like Table 1. 

Outcome Probability 

Winning the raffle 1% 

Losing the raffle 99% 

Table 1 

The sum of the probabilities listed in a probability model must equal 1, or 100%. 
...

HOW TO 

Given a probability event where each event is equally likely, construct a probability model. 

1. Identify every outcome. 
2. Determine the total number of possible outcomes. 
3. Compare each outcome to the total number of possible outcomes. 

1 The figure is for illustrative purposes only and does not model any particular storm. 



1262     13 • Sequences, Probability, and Counting Theory

EXAMPLE 1 

Constructing a Probability Model 
Construct a probability model for rolling a single, fair die, with the event being the number shown on the die. 

Solution 
Begin by making a list of all possible outcomes for the experiment. The possible outcomes are the numbers that can be 
rolled: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6. There are six possible outcomes that make up the sample space. 
Assign probabilities to each outcome in the sample space by determining a ratio of the outcome to the number of 
possible outcomes. There is one of each of the six numbers on the cube, and there is no reason to think that any 
particular face is more likely to show up than any other one, so the probability of rolling any number is 

Outcome Roll of 1 Roll of 2 Roll of 3 Roll of 4 Roll of 5 Roll of 6 

Probability 

Table 2 

 Q&A Do probabilities always have to be expressed as fractions? 

No. Probabilities can be expressed as fractions, decimals, or percents. Probability must always be a 
number between 0 and 1, inclusive of 0 and 1. 

 TRY IT #1 Construct a probability model for tossing a fair coin. 

Computing Probabilities of Equally Likely Outcomes 
Let  be a sample space for an experiment. When investigating probability, an event is any subset of  When the 
outcomes of an experiment are all equally likely, we can find the probability of an event by dividing the number of 
outcomes in the event by the total number of outcomes in  Suppose a number cube is rolled, and we are interested in 
finding the probability of the event “rolling a number less than or equal to 4.” There are 4 possible outcomes in the event 
and 6 possible outcomes in  so the probability of the event is 

Computing the Probability of an Event with Equally Likely Outcomes 

The probability of an event  in an experiment with sample space  with equally likely outcomes is given by 

 is a subset of  so it is always true that 

EXAMPLE 2 

Computing the Probability of an Event with Equally Likely Outcomes 
A six-sided number cube is rolled. Find the probability of rolling an odd number. 

Solution 
The event “rolling an odd number” contains three outcomes. There are 6 equally likely outcomes in the sample space. 
Divide to find the probability of the event. 

Access for free at openstax.org



13.7 • Probability     1263

 TRY IT #2 A number cube is rolled. Find the probability of rolling a number greater than 2. 

Computing the Probability of the Union of Two Events 
We are often interested in finding the probability that one of multiple events occurs. Suppose we are playing a card 
game, and we will win if the next card drawn is either a heart or a king. We would be interested in finding the probability 
of the next card being a heart or a king. The union of two events  is the event that occurs if 
either or both events occur. 

Suppose the spinner in Figure 2 is spun. We want to find the probability of spinning orange or spinning a 

Figure 2 

There are a total of 6 sections, and 3 of them are orange. So the probability of spinning orange is  There are a 
total of 6 sections, and 2 of them have a  So the probability of spinning a  is  If we added these two 
probabilities, we would be counting the sector that is both orange and a  twice. To find the probability of spinning an 
orange or a  we need to subtract the probability that the sector is both orange and has a 

The probability of spinning orange or a  is 

Probability of the Union of Two Events 

The probability of the union of two events  and  (written  ) equals the sum of the probability of  and the 
probability of  minus the probability of  and  occurring together  which is called the intersection of  and  and 
is written as  ). 

EXAMPLE 3 

Computing the Probability of the Union of Two Events 
A card is drawn from a standard deck. Find the probability of drawing a heart or a 7. 

Solution 
A standard deck contains an equal number of hearts, diamonds, clubs, and spades. So the probability of drawing a heart 
is  There are four 7s in a standard deck, and there are a total of 52 cards. So the probability of drawing a 7 is 

The only card in the deck that is both a heart and a 7 is the 7 of hearts, so the probability of drawing both a heart and a 7 
is  Substitute  into the formula. 

​ ​



1264     13 • Sequences, Probability, and Counting Theory

The probability of drawing a heart or a 7 is 

 TRY IT #3 A card is drawn from a standard deck. Find the probability of drawing a red card or an ace. 

Computing the Probability of Mutually Exclusive Events 
Suppose the spinner in Figure 2 is spun again, but this time we are interested in the probability of spinning an orange or 
a  There are no sectors that are both orange and contain a  so these two events have no outcomes in common. 
Events are said to be mutually exclusive events when they have no outcomes in common. Because there is no overlap, 
there is nothing to subtract, so the general formula is 

Notice that with mutually exclusive events, the intersection of  and  is the empty set. The probability of spinning an 
orange is  and the probability of spinning a  is  We can find the probability of spinning an orange or a  simply 
by adding the two probabilities. 

​

The probability of spinning an orange or a  is 

Probability of the Union of Mutually Exclusive Events 

The probability of the union of two mutually exclusive events  is given by 

...
HOW TO 

Given a set of events, compute the probability of the union of mutually exclusive events. 

1. Determine the total number of outcomes for the first event. 
2. Find the probability of the first event. 
3. Determine the total number of outcomes for the second event. 
4. Find the probability of the second event. 
5. Add the probabilities. 

EXAMPLE 4 

Computing the Probability of the Union of Mutually Exclusive Events 
A card is drawn from a standard deck. Find the probability of drawing a heart or a spade. 

Solution 
The events “drawing a heart” and “drawing a spade” are mutually exclusive because they cannot occur at the same time. 
The probability of drawing a heart is  and the probability of drawing a spade is also  so the probability of drawing a 
heart or a spade is 

 TRY IT #4 A card is drawn from a standard deck. Find the probability of drawing an ace or a king. 

Access for free at openstax.org



13.7 • Probability     1265

Using the Complement Rule to Compute Probabilities 
We have discussed how to calculate the probability that an event will happen. Sometimes, we are interested in finding 
the probability that an event will not happen. The complement of an event  denoted  is the set of outcomes in the 
sample space that are not in  For example, suppose we are interested in the probability that a horse will lose a race. If 
event  is the horse winning the race, then the complement of event  is the horse losing the race. 
To find the probability that the horse loses the race, we need to use the fact that the sum of all probabilities in a 
probability model must be 1. 

The probability of the horse winning added to the probability of the horse losing must be equal to 1. Therefore, if the 
probability of the horse winning the race is  the probability of the horse losing the race is simply 

The Complement Rule 

The probability that the complement of an event will occur is given by 

EXAMPLE 5 

Using the Complement Rule to Calculate Probabilities 
Two six-sided number cubes are rolled. 

ⓐ Find the probability that the sum of the numbers rolled is less than or equal to 3. 
ⓑ Find the probability that the sum of the numbers rolled is greater than 3. 

Solution 
The first step is to identify the sample space, which consists of all the possible outcomes. There are two number cubes, 
and each number cube has six possible outcomes. Using the Multiplication Principle, we find that there are  or 
total possible outcomes. So, for example, 1-1 represents a 1 rolled on each number cube. 

 

Table 3 

ⓐ We need to count the number of ways to roll a sum of 3 or less. These would include the following outcomes: 1-1, 
1-2, and 2-1. So there are only three ways to roll a sum of 3 or less. The probability is 



1266     13 • Sequences, Probability, and Counting Theory

ⓑ Rather than listing all the possibilities, we can use the Complement Rule. Because we have already found the 
probability of the complement of this event, we can simply subtract that probability from 1 to find the probability that 
the sum of the numbers rolled is greater than 3. 

 TRY IT #5 Two number cubes are rolled. Use the Complement Rule to find the probability that the sum is 
less than 10. 

Computing Probability Using Counting Theory 
Many interesting probability problems involve counting principles, permutations, and combinations. In these problems, 
we will use permutations and combinations to find the number of elements in events and sample spaces. These 
problems can be complicated, but they can be made easier by breaking them down into smaller counting problems. 
Assume, for example, that a store has 8 cellular phones and that 3 of those are defective. We might want to find the 
probability that a couple purchasing 2 phones receives 2 phones that are not defective. To solve this problem, we need 
to calculate all of the ways to select 2 phones that are not defective as well as all of the ways to select 2 phones. There 
are 5 phones that are not defective, so there are  ways to select 2 phones that are not defective. There are 8 
phones, so there are  ways to select 2 phones. The probability of selecting 2 phones that are not defective is: 

EXAMPLE 6 

Computing Probability Using Counting Theory 
A child randomly selects 5 toys from a bin containing 3 bunnies, 5 dogs, and 6 bears. 

ⓐ Find the probability that only bears are chosen.  ⓑ Find the probability that 2 bears and 3 dogs are chosen. 
ⓒ Find the probability that at least 2 dogs are chosen. 

Solution 
ⓐ We need to count the number of ways to choose only bears and the total number of possible ways to select 5 
toys. There are 6 bears, so there are  ways to choose 5 bears. There are 14 toys, so there are  ways to 
choose any 5 toys. 

ⓑ We need to count the number of ways to choose 2 bears and 3 dogs and the total number of possible ways to 
select 5 toys. There are 6 bears, so there are  ways to choose 2 bears. There are 5 dogs, so there are 
ways to choose 3 dogs. Since we are choosing both bears and dogs at the same time, we will use the Multiplication 
Principle. There are  ways to choose 2 bears and 3 dogs. We can use this result to find the probability. 

Access for free at openstax.org



13.7 • Probability     1267

ⓒ It is often easiest to solve “at least” problems using the Complement Rule. We will begin by finding the probability 
that fewer than 2 dogs are chosen. If less than 2 dogs are chosen, then either no dogs could be chosen, or 1 dog 
could be chosen. 
When no dogs are chosen, all 5 toys come from the 9 toys that are not dogs. There are  ways to choose toys 
from the 9 toys that are not dogs. Since there are 14 toys, there are  ways to choose the 5 toys from all of the 
toys. 

If there is 1 dog chosen, then 4 toys must come from the 9 toys that are not dogs, and 1 must come from the 5 dogs. 
Since we are choosing both dogs and other toys at the same time, we will use the Multiplication Principle. There are 

 ways to choose 1 dog and 1 other toy. 

Because these events would not occur together and are therefore mutually exclusive, we add the probabilities to find 
the probability that fewer than 2 dogs are chosen. 

We then subtract that probability from 1 to find the probability that at least 2 dogs are chosen. 

 TRY IT #6 A child randomly selects 3 gumballs from a container holding 4 purple gumballs, 8 yellow 
gumballs, and 2 green gumballs. 

ⓐ Find the probability that all 3 gumballs selected are purple. 
ⓑ Find the probability that no yellow gumballs are selected. 
ⓒ Find the probability that at least 1 yellow gumball is selected. 

 MEDIA 

Access these online resources for additional instruction and practice with probability. 

Introduction to Probability (https://openstax.org/l/introprob) 
Determining Probability (https://openstax.org/l/determineprob) 

 13.7 SECTION EXERCISES 
Verbal 

1 . What term is used to  2 . What is a sample space?  3 . What is an experiment? 
express the likelihood of an 
event occurring? Are there 
restrictions on its values? If 
so, what are they? If not, 
explain. 



1268     13 • Sequences, Probability, and Counting Theory

4 . What is the difference  5 . The union of two sets is 
between events and defined as a set of elements 
outcomes? Give an example that are present in at least 
of both using the sample one of the sets. How is this 
space of tossing a coin 50 similar to the definition 
times. used for the union of two 

events from a probability 
model? How is it different? 

Numeric 

For the following exercises, use the spinner shown in Figure 3 to find the probabilities indicated. 

Figure 3 
6 . Landing on red  7 . Landing on a vowel  8 . Not landing on blue 
9 . Landing on purple or a  10 . Landing on blue or a vowel  11 . Landing on green or blue 

vowel 
12 . Landing on yellow or a  13 . Not landing on yellow or a 

consonant consonant 

For the following exercises, two coins are tossed. 
14 . What is the sample space?  15 . Find the probability of  16 . Find the probability of 

tossing two heads. tossing exactly one tail. 
17 . Find the probability of 

tossing at least one tail. 

For the following exercises, four coins are tossed. 
18 . What is the sample space?  19 . Find the probability of  20 . Find the probability of 

tossing exactly two heads. tossing exactly three 
heads. 

21 . Find the probability of  22 . Find the probability of  23 . Find the probability of 
tossing four heads or four tossing all tails. tossing not all tails. 
tails. 

24 . Find the probability of  25 . Find the probability of 
tossing exactly two heads tossing either two heads or 
or at least two tails. three heads. 

For the following exercises, one card is drawn from a standard deck of  cards. Find the probability of drawing the 
following: 
26 . A club  27 . A two  28 . Six or seven 
29 . Red six  30 . An ace or a diamond  31 . A non-ace 

Access for free at openstax.org



13.7 • Probability     1269

32 . A heart or a non-jack 

For the following exercises, two dice are rolled, and the results are summed. 
33 . Construct a table showing the sample space of 34 . Find the probability of rolling a sum of 

outcomes and sums. 
35 . Find the probability of rolling at least one four or a  36 . Find the probability of rolling an odd sum less 

sum of than 
37 . Find the probability of rolling a sum greater than  38 . Find the probability of 

or equal to rolling a sum less than 
39 . Find the probability of  40 . Find the probability of  41 . Find the probability of 

rolling a sum less than  or rolling a sum between rolling a sum of  or 
greater than and  inclusive. 

42 . Find the probability of 
rolling any sum other than 

 or 

For the following exercises, a coin is tossed, and a card is pulled from a standard deck. Find the probability of the 
following: 
43 . A head on the coin or a  44 . A tail on the coin or red ace  45 . A head on the coin or a 

club face card 
46 . No aces 

For the following exercises, use this scenario: a bag of M&Ms contains  blue,  brown,  orange,  yellow,  red, and 
green M&Ms. Reaching into the bag, a person grabs 5 M&Ms. 
47 . What is the probability of  48 . What is the probability of  49 . What is the probability of 

getting all blue M&Ms? getting  blue M&Ms? getting  blue M&Ms? 
50 . What is the probability of 

getting no brown M&Ms? 

Extensions 

Use the following scenario for the exercises that follow: In the game of Keno, a player starts by selecting  numbers 
from the numbers  to  After the player makes his selections,  winning numbers are randomly selected from 
numbers  to  A win occurs if the player has correctly selected  or  of the  winning numbers. (Round all 
answers to the nearest hundredth of a percent.) 
51 . What is the percent chance  52 . What is the percent chance  53 . What is the percent chance 

that a player selects exactly that a player selects exactly that a player selects all 5 
3 winning numbers? 4 winning numbers? winning numbers? 

54 . What is the percent chance  55 . How much less is a player’s 
of winning? chance of selecting 3 

winning numbers than the 
chance of selecting either 4 
or 5 winning numbers? 



1270     13 • Sequences, Probability, and Counting Theory

Real-World Applications 

Use this data for the exercises that follow: In 2013, there were roughly 317 million citizens in the United States, and 
about 40 million were elderly (aged 65 and over).2 

56 . If you meet a U.S. citizen,  57 . If you meet five U.S.  58 . If you meet five U.S. 
what is the percent chance citizens, what is the citizens, what is the 
that the person is elderly? percent chance that exactly percent chance that three 
(Round to the nearest one is elderly? (Round to are elderly? (Round to the 
tenth of a percent.) the nearest tenth of a nearest tenth of a percent.) 

percent.) 
59 . If you meet five U.S.  60 . It is predicted that by 2030, 

citizens, what is the one in five U.S. citizens will 
percent chance that four be elderly. How much 
are elderly? (Round to the greater will the chances of 
nearest thousandth of a meeting an elderly person 
percent.) be at that time? What 

policy changes do you 
foresee if these statistics 
hold true? 

2 United States Census Bureau. http://www.census.gov 

Access for free at openstax.org



13 • Chapter Review     1271

Chapter Review 
Key Terms 
Addition Principle  if one event can occur in  ways and a second event with no common outcomes can occur in 

ways, then the first or second event can occur in  ways 
annuity  an investment in which the purchaser makes a sequence of periodic, equal payments 
arithmetic sequence  a sequence in which the difference between any two consecutive terms is a constant 
arithmetic series  the sum of the terms in an arithmetic sequence 
binomial coefficient  the number of ways to choose r objects from n objects where order does not matter; equivalent 

to  denoted 

binomial expansion  the result of expanding  by multiplying 
Binomial Theorem  a formula that can be used to expand any binomial 
combination  a selection of objects in which order does not matter 
common difference  the difference between any two consecutive terms in an arithmetic sequence 
common ratio  the ratio between any two consecutive terms in a geometric sequence 
complement of an event  the set of outcomes in the sample space that are not in the event 
diverge  a series is said to diverge if the sum is not a real number 
event  any subset of a sample space 
experiment  an activity with an observable result 
explicit formula  a formula that defines each term of a sequence in terms of its position in the sequence 
finite sequence  a function whose domain consists of a finite subset of the positive integers  for some 

positive integer 
Fundamental Counting Principle  if one event can occur in  ways and a second event can occur in  ways after the 

first event has occurred, then the two events can occur in  ways; also known as the Multiplication Principle 
geometric sequence  a sequence in which the ratio of a term to a previous term is a constant 
geometric series  the sum of the terms in a geometric sequence 
index of summation  in summation notation, the variable used in the explicit formula for the terms of a series and 

written below the sigma with the lower limit of summation 
infinite sequence  a function whose domain is the set of positive integers 
infinite series  the sum of the terms in an infinite sequence 
lower limit of summation  the number used in the explicit formula to find the first term in a series 
Multiplication Principle  if one event can occur in  ways and a second event can occur in  ways after the first event 

has occurred, then the two events can occur in  ways; also known as the Fundamental Counting Principle 
mutually exclusive events  events that have no outcomes in common 
n factorial  the product of all the positive integers from 1 to 
nth partial sum  the sum of the first  terms of a sequence 
nth term of a sequence  a formula for the general term of a sequence 
outcomes  the possible results of an experiment 
permutation  a selection of objects in which order matters 
probability  a number from 0 to 1 indicating the likelihood of an event 
probability model  a mathematical description of an experiment listing all possible outcomes and their associated 

probabilities 
recursive formula  a formula that defines each term of a sequence using previous term(s) 
sample space  the set of all possible outcomes of an experiment 
sequence  a function whose domain is a subset of the positive integers 
series  the sum of the terms in a sequence 
summation notation  a notation for series using the Greek letter sigma; it includes an explicit formula and specifies 

the first and last terms in the series 
term  a number in a sequence 
union of two events  the event that occurs if either or both events occur 
upper limit of summation  the number used in the explicit formula to find the last term in a series 



1272     13 • Chapter Review

Key Equations 

Formula for a factorial 

recursive formula for nth term of an arithmetic sequence 

explicit formula for nth term of an arithmetic sequence 

recursive formula for  term of a geometric sequence 

explicit formula for  term of a geometric sequence 

sum of the first  terms of an arithmetic series 

sum of the first  terms of a geometric series 

sum of an infinite geometric series with 

number of permutations of  distinct objects taken  at a time 

number of combinations of  distinct objects taken  at a time 

number of permutations of  non-distinct objects 

Binomial Theorem 

 term of a binomial expansion 

probability of an event with equally likely outcomes 

probability of the union of two events 

probability of the union of mutually exclusive events 

probability of the complement of an event 

Access for free at openstax.org



13 • Chapter Review     1273

Key Concepts 
13.1 Sequences and Their Notations 

• A sequence is a list of numbers, called terms, written in a specific order. 
• Explicit formulas define each term of a sequence using the position of the term. See Example 1, Example 2, and 

Example 3. 
• An explicit formula for the  term of a sequence can be written by analyzing the pattern of several terms. See 

Example 4. 
• Recursive formulas define each term of a sequence using previous terms. 
• Recursive formulas must state the initial term, or terms, of a sequence. 
• A set of terms can be written by using a recursive formula. See Example 5 and Example 6. 
• A factorial is a mathematical operation that can be defined recursively. 
• The factorial of  is the product of all integers from 1 to  See Example 7. 

13.2 Arithmetic Sequences 
• An arithmetic sequence is a sequence where the difference between any two consecutive terms is a constant. 
• The constant between two consecutive terms is called the common difference. 
• The common difference is the number added to any one term of an arithmetic sequence that generates the 

subsequent term. See Example 1. 
• The terms of an arithmetic sequence can be found by beginning with the initial term and adding the common 

difference repeatedly. See Example 2 and Example 3. 
• A recursive formula for an arithmetic sequence with common difference  is given by  See 

Example 4. 
• As with any recursive formula, the initial term of the sequence must be given. 
• An explicit formula for an arithmetic sequence with common difference  is given by  See 

Example 5. 
• An explicit formula can be used to find the number of terms in a sequence. See Example 6. 
• In application problems, we sometimes alter the explicit formula slightly to  See Example 7. 

13.3 Geometric Sequences 
• A geometric sequence is a sequence in which the ratio between any two consecutive terms is a constant. 
• The constant ratio between two consecutive terms is called the common ratio. 
• The common ratio can be found by dividing any term in the sequence by the previous term. See Example 1. 
• The terms of a geometric sequence can be found by beginning with the first term and multiplying by the common 

ratio repeatedly. See Example 2 and Example 4. 
• A recursive formula for a geometric sequence with common ratio  is given by  for  . 
• As with any recursive formula, the initial term of the sequence must be given. See Example 3. 
• An explicit formula for a geometric sequence with common ratio  is given by  See Example 5. 
• In application problems, we sometimes alter the explicit formula slightly to  See Example 6. 

13.4 Series and Their Notations 
• The sum of the terms in a sequence is called a series. 
• A common notation for series is called summation notation, which uses the Greek letter sigma to represent the 

sum. See Example 1. 
• The sum of the terms in an arithmetic sequence is called an arithmetic series. 
• The sum of the first  terms of an arithmetic series can be found using a formula. See Example 2 and Example 3. 
• The sum of the terms in a geometric sequence is called a geometric series. 
• The sum of the first  terms of a geometric series can be found using a formula. See Example 4 and Example 5. 
• The sum of an infinite series exists if the series is geometric with 
• If the sum of an infinite series exists, it can be found using a formula. See Example 6, Example 7, and Example 8. 
• An annuity is an account into which the investor makes a series of regularly scheduled payments. The value of an 

annuity can be found using geometric series. See Example 9. 

13.5 Counting Principles 
• If one event can occur in  ways and a second event with no common outcomes can occur in  ways, then the first 

or second event can occur in  ways. See Example 1. 
• If one event can occur in  ways and a second event can occur in  ways after the first event has occurred, then the 

two events can occur in  ways. See Example 2. 



1274     13 • Exercises

• A permutation is an ordering of  objects. 
• If we have a set of  objects and we want to choose  objects from the set in order, we write 
• Permutation problems can be solved using the Multiplication Principle or the formula for  See Example 3 and 

Example 4. 
• A selection of objects where the order does not matter is a combination. 
• Given  distinct objects, the number of ways to select  objects from the set is  and can be found using a 

formula. See Example 5. 
• A set containing  distinct objects has  subsets. See Example 6. 
• For counting problems involving non-distinct objects, we need to divide to avoid counting duplicate permutations. 

See Example 7. 

13.6 Binomial Theorem 

•  is called a binomial coefficient and is equal to  See Example 1. 

• The Binomial Theorem allows us to expand binomials without multiplying. See Example 2. 
• We can find a given term of a binomial expansion without fully expanding the binomial. See Example 3. 

13.7 Probability 
• Probability is always a number between 0 and 1, where 0 means an event is impossible and 1 means an event is 

certain. 
• The probabilities in a probability model must sum to 1. See Example 1. 
• When the outcomes of an experiment are all equally likely, we can find the probability of an event by dividing the 

number of outcomes in the event by the total number of outcomes in the sample space for the experiment. See 
Example 2. 

• To find the probability of the union of two events, we add the probabilities of the two events and subtract the 
probability that both events occur simultaneously. See Example 3. 

• To find the probability of the union of two mutually exclusive events, we add the probabilities of each of the events. 
See Example 4. 

• The probability of the complement of an event is the difference between 1 and the probability that the event occurs. 
See Example 5. 

• In some probability problems, we need to use permutations and combinations to find the number of elements in 
events and sample spaces. See Example 6. 

Exercises 
Review Exercises 
Sequences and Their Notation 
1 . Write the first four terms of  2 . Evaluate  3 . Write the first four terms of 

the sequence defined by the the sequence defined by the 
recursive formula explicit formula 

4 . Write the first four terms of 
the sequence defined by the 
explicit formula 

Arithmetic Sequences 
5 . Is the sequence  6 . Is the sequence  7 . An arithmetic sequence has 

 arithmetic? If the first term  and 
arithmetic? If so, find the so, find the common common difference 
common difference. difference. What are the first five 

terms? 

Access for free at openstax.org



13 • Exercises     1275

8 . An arithmetic sequence has  9 . Write a recursive formula  10 . Write a recursive formula 
terms  and for the arithmetic sequence for the arithmetic 

 What is the first sequence 
term? 

and then find the 31st 

term. 
11 . Write an explicit formula  12 . How many terms are in the 

for the arithmetic finite arithmetic sequence 
sequence 

Geometric Sequences 
13 . Find the common ratio for  14 . Is the sequence 4, 16, 28,  15 . A geometric sequence has 

the geometric sequence 40 … geometric? If so find terms  and 
the common ratio. If not, . What are 
explain why. the first five terms? 

16 . A geometric sequence has  17 . What are the first five  18 . Write a recursive formula 
the first term  and terms of the geometric for the geometric 
common ratio  What sequence sequence 
is the 8th term? 

19 . Write an explicit formula for the  20 . How many terms are in the 
geometric sequence finite geometric sequence 

Series and Their Notation 
21 . Use summation notation to  22 . Use summation notation to  23 . Use the formula for the 

write the sum of terms write the sum that results sum of the first  terms of 
 from  to from adding the number an arithmetic series to find 

 twenty times. the sum of the first eleven 
terms of the arithmetic 
series 2.5, 4, 5.5, … . 

24 . A ladder has  tapered  25 . Use the formula for the  26 . The fees for the first three 
rungs, the lengths of which sum of the first n terms of years of a hunting club 
increase by a common a geometric series to find membership are given in 
difference. The first rung is  for the series Table 1. If fees continue to 
5 inches long, and the last rise at the same rate, how 
rung is 20 inches long. much will the total cost be 
What is the sum of the for the first ten years of 
lengths of the rungs? membership? 

Year Membership 
Fees 

1 $1500 

2 $1950 

3 $2535 

Table 1 



1276     13 • Exercises

27 . Find the sum of the infinite  28 . A ball has a bounce-back  29 . Alejandro deposits $80 of 
geometric series ratio of  the height of the his monthly earnings into 

∞ previous bounce. Write a an annuity that earns 
series representing the 6.25% annual interest, 
total distance traveled by compounded monthly. 
the ball, assuming it was How much money will he 
initially dropped from a have saved after 5 years? 
height of 5 feet. What is 
the total distance? (Hint: 
the total distance the ball 
travels on each bounce is 
the sum of the heights of 
the rise and the fall.) 

30 . The twins Hoa and Binh 
both opened retirement 
accounts on their 21st 

birthday. Hoa deposits 
$4,800.00 each year, 
earning 5.5% annual 
interest, compounded 
monthly. Binh deposits 
$3,600.00 each year, 
earning 8.5% annual 
interest, compounded 
monthly. Which twin will 
earn the most interest by 
the time they are  years 
old? How much more? 

Counting Principles 
31 . How many ways are there to  32 . In a group of  musicians,  33 . How many ways are there 

choose a number from the  play piano,  play to construct a 4-digit code 
set trumpet, and  play both if numbers can be 

piano and trumpet. How repeated? 
that is divisible by either many musicians play either 
or piano or trumpet? 

34 . A palette of water color  35 . Calculate  36 . In a group of  first-year, 
paints has 3 shades of  second-year,  third-
green, 3 shades of blue, 2 year, and  fourth-year 
shades of red, 2 shades of students, how many ways 
yellow, and 1 shade of can a president, vice 
black. How many ways are president, and treasurer be 
there to choose one shade elected? 
of each color? 

37 . Calculate  38 . A coffee shop has 7  39 . How many subsets does 
Guatemalan roasts, 4 the set 
Cuban roasts, and 10 Costa  have? 
Rican roasts. How many 
ways can the shop choose 
2 Guatemalan, 2 Cuban, 
and 3 Costa Rican roasts 
for a coffee tasting event? 

Access for free at openstax.org



13 • Exercises     1277

40 . A day spa charges a basic  41 . How many distinct ways  42 . How many distinct 
day rate that includes use can the word DEADWOOD rearrangements of the 
of a sauna, pool, and be arranged? letters of the word 
showers. For an extra DEADWOOD are there if 
charge, guests can choose the arrangement must 
from the following begin and end with the 
additional services: letter D? 
massage, body scrub, 
manicure, pedicure, facial, 
and straight-razor shave. 
How many ways are there 
to order additional services 
at the day spa? 

Binomial Theorem 
43 . Evaluate the binomial  44 . Use the Binomial Theorem  45 . Use the Binomial Theorem 

coefficient to expand to write the first three 
terms of 

46 . Find the fourth term of 
 without fully 

expanding the binomial. 

Probability 

For the following exercises, assume two die are rolled. 
47 . Construct a table showing the sample space. 48 . What is the probability that a roll includes a 
49 . What is the probability of  50 . What is the probability that a roll includes a 2 or 

rolling a pair? results in a pair? 
51 . What is the probability that  52 . What is the probability of rolling a 5 or a 6? 

a roll doesn’t include a 2 or 
result in a pair? 

53 . What is the probability that 
a roll includes neither a 5 
nor a 6? 

For the following exercises, use the following data: An elementary school survey found that 350 of the 500 students 
preferred soda to milk. Suppose 8 children from the school are attending a birthday party. (Show calculations and round 
to the nearest tenth of a percent.) 
54 . What is the percent chance  55 . What is the percent chance  56 . What is the percent chance 

that all the children that at least one of the that exactly 3 of the 
attending the party prefer children attending the children attending the 
soda? party prefers milk? party prefer soda? 

57 . What is the percent chance 
that exactly 3 of the 
children attending the 
party prefer milk? 

Practice Test 
1 . Write the first four terms of  2 . Write the first four terms of  3 . Is the sequence 

the sequence defined by the the sequence defined by the 
recursive formula explicit formula arithmetic? If so find the 

common difference. 



1278     13 • Exercises

4 . An arithmetic sequence has  5 . Write a recursive formula  6 . Write an explicit formula for 
the first term  and for the arithmetic sequence the arithmetic sequence 
common difference 
What is the 6th term? and then find the 22nd term. and then find the 32nd term. 

7 . Is the sequence  8 . What is the 11th term of the  9 . Write a recursive formula 
geometric sequence for the geometric sequence 

geometric? If so find the 
common ratio. If not, 
explain why. 

10 . Write an explicit formula  11 . Use summation notation to  12 . A community baseball 
for the geometric write the sum of terms stadium has 10 seats in the 
sequence  from  to first row, 13 seats in the 

second row, 16 seats in the 
third row, and so on. There 
are 56 rows in all. What is 
the seating capacity of the 
stadium? 

13 . Use the formula for the  14 . Find the sum of the infinite  15 . Ramla deposits $3,600 into 
sum of the first  terms of geometric series a retirement fund each 
a geometric series to find ∞ year. The fund earns 7.5% 

annual interest, 
compounded monthly. If 
she opened her account 
when she was 20 years old, 
how much will she have by 
the time she’s 55? How 
much of that amount was 
interest earned? 

16 . In a competition of 50  17 . A buyer of a new sedan can  18 . To allocate annual 
professional ballroom custom order the car by bonuses, a manager must 
dancers, 22 compete in the choosing from 5 different choose his top four 
fox-trot competition, 18 exterior colors, 3 different employees and rank them 
compete in the tango interior colors, 2 sound first to fourth. In how 
competition, and 6 systems, 3 motor designs, many ways can he create 
compete in both the fox- and either manual or the “Top-Four” list out of 
trot and tango automatic transmission. the 32 employees? 
competitions. How many How many choices does 
dancers compete in the the buyer have? 
fox-trot or tango 
competitions? 

19 . A music group needs to  20 . A self-serve frozen yogurt  21 . How many distinct ways 
choose 3 songs to play at shop has 8 candy toppings can the word 
the annual Battle of the and 4 fruit toppings to EVANESCENCE be arranged 
Bands. How many ways choose from. How many if the anagram must end 
can they choose their set if ways are there to top a with the letter E? 
they have 15 songs to pick frozen yogurt? 
from? 

22 . Use the Binomial Theorem  23 . Find the seventh term of 
to expand  without fully 

expanding the binomial. 

Access for free at openstax.org



13 • Exercises     1279

For the following exercises, use the spinner in Figure 1. 

Figure 1 
24 . Construct a probability  25 . What is the probability of  26 . What is the probability of 

model showing each landing on an odd landing on blue? 
possible outcome and its number? 
associated probability. (Use 
the first letter for colors.) 

27 . What is the probability of  28 . What is the probability of  29 . A bowl of candy holds 16 
landing on blue or an odd landing on anything other peppermint, 14 
number? than blue or an odd butterscotch, and 10 

number? strawberry flavored 
candies. Suppose a person 
grabs a handful of 7 
candies. What is the 
percent chance that exactly 
3 are butterscotch? (Show 
calculations and round to 
the nearest tenth of a 
percent.) 



1280     13 • Exercises

Access for free at openstax.org



A • Proofs, Identities, and Toolkit Functions     1281

A PROOFS, IDENTITIES, AND TOOLKIT FUNCTIONS 
Important Proofs and Derivations 
Product Rule 

Proof: 
Let  and 

Write in exponent form. 
 and 

Multiply. 

Change of Base Rule 

where  and  are positive, and 
Proof: 
Let 

Write in exponent form. 

Take the  of both sides. 

When 

Heron’s Formula 

where 

Proof: 
Let   and  be the sides of a triangle, and  be the height. 



1282     A • Proofs, Identities, and Toolkit Functions

So . 

We can further name the parts of the base in each triangle established by the height such that 

Using the Pythagorean Theorem,  and 

Since  then  Expanding, we find that 

We can then add  to each side of the equation to get 

Substitute this result into the equation  yields 

Then replacing  with  gives 
Solve for  to get 

Since  we get an expression in terms of   and 

Therefore, 

And since  then 

Access for free at openstax.org



A • Proofs, Identities, and Toolkit Functions     1283

Properties of the Dot Product 

Proof: 

Proof: 

Proof: 

Standard Form of the Ellipse centered at the Origin 

Derivation 
An ellipse consists of all the points for which the sum of distances from two foci is constant: 



1284     A • Proofs, Identities, and Toolkit Functions

Consider a vertex. 

Then, 
Consider a covertex. 

Then 

Access for free at openstax.org



A • Proofs, Identities, and Toolkit Functions     1285

Let 

Because  then 

Standard Form of the Hyperbola 

Derivation 
A hyperbola is the set of all points in a plane such that the absolute value of the difference of the distances between two 
fixed points is constant. 



1286     A • Proofs, Identities, and Toolkit Functions

Diagram 1: The difference of the distances from Point P to the foci is constant: 

Diagram 2: When the point is a vertex, the difference is 

Define  as a positive number such that 

Access for free at openstax.org



A • Proofs, Identities, and Toolkit Functions     1287

Trigonometric Identities 
Pythagorean Identities 

Even-Odd Identities 

Cofunction Identities 

Fundamental Identities 

Sum and Difference Identities 

Double-Angle Formulas 

Table A1 



1288     A • Proofs, Identities, and Toolkit Functions

Half-Angle Formulas 

Reduction Formulas 

Product-to-Sum Formulas 

Sum-to-Product Formulas 

Law of Sines 

Law of Cosines 

Table A1 

Access for free at openstax.org



A • Proofs, Identities, and Toolkit Functions     1289

ToolKit Functions 

Figure A1 

Figure A2 



1290     A • Proofs, Identities, and Toolkit Functions

Figure A3 

Trigonometric Functions 
Unit Circle 

Figure A4 

Access for free at openstax.org



A • Proofs, Identities, and Toolkit Functions     1291

Angle 

Cosine 1 0 

Sine 0 1 

Tangent 0 1 Undefined 

Secant 1 2 Undefined 

Cosecant Undefined 2 1 

Cotangent Undefined 1 0 

Table A2 



1292     A • Proofs, Identities, and Toolkit Functions

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     1293

Answer Key 
Chapter 1 
Try It 
1.1 Real Numbers: Algebra Essentials 
1 . ⓐ  ⓑ  ⓒ  2 . ⓐ 4 (or 4.0), terminating; 3 . ⓐ rational and repeating; 

ⓑ   repeating; ⓑ rational and terminating; 
ⓒ –0.85, terminating ⓒ irrational; 

ⓓ rational and terminating; 
ⓔ irrational 

4 . ⓐ positive, irrational; right 5 . 6 . ⓐ 10 ⓑ 2 ⓒ 4.5 ⓓ 25 
ⓑ negative, rational; left N W I Q Q' ⓔ 26 
ⓒ positive, rational; right a. X X 
ⓓ negative, irrational; left 
ⓔ positive, rational; right b. 0 X X X 

c. X X X X 

d. X 

e. X 
4.763763763... 

7 . ⓐ 11, commutative 8 . 9 . ⓐ 5; ⓑ 11; ⓒ 9; ⓓ 26 
property of multiplication, Constants Variables 
associative property of a. 
multiplication, inverse 
property of multiplication, 
identity property of b. 2(L + W) 2 L, W 
multiplication; 
ⓑ 33, distributive property; c. 4 

ⓒ 26, distributive property; 
ⓓ   commutative 
property of addition, 
associative property of 
addition, inverse property of 
addition, identity property of 
addition; 
ⓔ 0, distributive property, 
inverse property of addition 

10 . ⓐ 4; ⓑ 11; ⓒ   ; 11 . 1,152 cm2 12 . ⓐ  
ⓓ 1728; ⓔ 3 ⓑ  ⓒ  

ⓓ  

13 . 



1294     Answer Key

1.2 Exponents and Scientific Notation 
1 . ⓐ  ⓑ  ⓒ  2 . ⓐ  ⓑ  3 . ⓐ  ⓑ  

ⓒ  ⓒ  

4 . ⓐ  ⓑ  ⓒ  ⓓ  5 . ⓐ  ⓑ  ⓒ  6 . ⓐ  ⓑ  

7 . ⓐ  ⓑ  8 . ⓐ  ⓑ  ⓒ  9 . ⓐ  ⓑ  ⓒ  
ⓒ  ⓓ  

ⓓ  ⓓ  ⓔ  ⓕ  
ⓔ  

ⓔ  

10 . ⓐ  11 . ⓐ  12 . ⓐ  
ⓑ  ⓑ  ⓑ  
ⓒ  ⓒ ⓒ  
ⓓ  ⓓ  
ⓔ  ⓓ  ⓔ  

13 . Number of cells: 
length of a cell: 
m; total length: 
m or  m. 

1.3 Radicals and Rational Exponents 
1 . ⓐ  ⓑ  ⓒ  ⓓ  2 .  Notice the 3 . 

absolute value signs around 
x and y? That’s because their 
value must be positive! 

4 .  We do not need the 5 . 6 . 
absolute value signs for 
because that term will 
always be nonnegative. 

7 . 8 . 9 . 

10 . ⓐ  ⓑ  ⓒ  11 . 12 . 

13 . 

1.4 Polynomials 
1 . The degree is 6, the leading 2 . 3 . 

term is  and the leading 
coefficient is 

4 . 5 . 6 . 

7 . 8 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     1295

1.5 Factoring Polynomials 
1 . 2 . 3 . ⓐ  

ⓑ  

4 . 5 . 6 . 

7 . 8 . 

1.6 Rational Expressions 
1 . 2 . 3 . 

4 . 5 . 

1.1 Section Exercises 
1 . irrational number. The 3 . The Associative Properties 5 . 

square root of two does not state that the sum or 
terminate, and it does not product of multiple 
repeat a pattern. It cannot numbers can be grouped 
be written as a quotient of differently without affecting 
two integers, so it is the result. This is because 
irrational. the same operation is 

performed (either addition 
or subtraction), so the terms 
can be re-ordered. 

7 . 9 . 11 . 9 

13 . -2 15 . 4 17 . 0 

19 . 9 21 . 25 23 . 

25 . 17 27 . 4 29 . 

31 . 33 . 35 . 

37 . 39 . 41 . 

43 . 45 . 47 . 

49 . 51 . 53 . 

55 . irrational number 57 . 59 . inverse property of 
addition 

61 . 68.4 63 . true 65 . irrational 

67 . rational 



1296     Answer Key

1.2 Section Exercises 
1 . No, the two expressions are 3 . It is a method of writing very 5 . 81 

not the same. An exponent small and very large 
tells how many times you numbers. 
multiply the base. So  is 
the same as  which 
is 8.  is the same as 
which is 9. 

7 . 243 9 . 11 . 

13 . 1 15 . 17 . 

19 . 21 . 23 . 16,000,000,000 

25 . 27 . 29 . 

31 . 33 . 35 . 

37 . 39 . 41 . 

43 . 45 . 0.00135 m 47 . 

49 . 0.00000000003397 in. 51 . 12,230,590,464 53 . 

55 . 57 . 

59 . 0.000000000000000000000000000000000662606957 

1.3 Section Exercises 
1 . When there is no index, it is 3 . The principal square root is 5 . 16 

assumed to be 2 or the the nonnegative root of the 
square root. The expression number. 
would only be equal to the 
radicand if the index were 1. 

7 . 10 9 . 14 11 . 

13 . 15 . 25 17 . 

19 . 21 . 23 . 

25 . 27 . 29 . 

31 . 33 . 35 . 

37 . 39 . 41 . 

43 . 45 . 47 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     1297

49 . 51 . 53 . 

55 . 57 . 59 . 

61 . 63 . 65 . 500 feet 

67 . 69 . 71 . 

73 . 

1.4 Section Exercises 
1 . The statement is true. In 3 . Use the distributive 5 . 2 

standard form, the property, multiply, combine 
polynomial with the highest like terms, and simplify. 
value exponent is placed 
first and is the leading term. 
The degree of a polynomial 
is the value of the highest 
exponent, which in standard 
form is also the exponent of 
the leading term. 

7 . 8 9 . 2 11 . 

13 . 15 . 17 . 

19 . 21 . 23 . 

25 . 27 . 29 . 

31 . 33 . 35 . 

37 . 39 . 41 . 

43 . 45 . 47 . 

49 . 51 . 53 .  m2 

55 . 57 . 

1.5 Section Exercises 
1 . The terms of a polynomial do 3 . Divide the  term into the 5 . 

not have to have a common sum of two terms, factor 
factor for the entire polynomial each portion of the 
to be factorable. For example, expression separately, and 

 and  don’t have a then factor out the GCF of 
common factor, but the whole the entire expression. 
polynomial is still factorable: 



1298     Answer Key

7 . 9 . 11 . 

13 . 15 . 17 . 

19 . 21 . 23 . 

25 . 27 . 29 . 

31 . 33 . 35 . 

37 . 39 . 41 . 

43 . 45 . 47 . 

49 . 51 . 53 . 

55 . 57 . 59 . 

1.6 Section Exercises 
1 . You can factor the 3 . True. Multiplication and 5 . 

numerator and division do not require 
denominator to see if any of finding the LCD because the 
the terms can cancel one denominators can be 
another out. combined through those 

operations, whereas 
addition and subtraction 
require like terms. 

7 . 9 . 11 . 

13 . 15 . 17 . 

19 . 21 . 23 . 

25 . 27 . 29 . 

31 . 33 . 35 . 

37 . 39 . 41 . 

43 . 45 . 47 . 

49 . 51 . 53 . 

55 . 57 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     1299

Review Exercises 
1 . 3 . 53 5 . 

7 . 9 . whole 11 . irrational 

13 . 15 . 17 . 

19 . 21 . 23 . 14 

25 . 27 . 29 . 

31 . 33 . 35 . 

37 . 39 . 41 . 

43 . 45 . 47 . 

49 . 51 . 53 . 

55 . 57 . 59 . 

61 . 63 . 65 . 

67 . 69 . 

Practice Test 
1 . rational 3 . 5 . 3,141,500 

7 . 9 . 9 11 . 

13 . 21 15 . 17 . 

19 . 21 . 23 . 

25 . 27 . 29 . 



1300     Answer Key

Chapter 2 
Try It 
2.1 The Rectangular Coordinate Systems and Graphs 
1 . 2 . x-intercept is  y-intercept 3 . 

is 

4 . 

2.2 Linear Equations in One Variable 
1 . 2 . 3 . 

4 . 5 .  Excluded values 6 . 
are  and 

7 . 8 . 9 . 

10 . Horizontal line: 11 . Parallel lines: equations are 12 . 
written in slope-intercept form. 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     1301

2.3 Models and Applications 
1 . 11 and 25 2 . 3 . 45 mi/h 

4 .  cm,  cm 5 . 250 ft2 

2.4 Complex Numbers 
1 . 2 . 3 . 

4 . 5 . 6 . 

7 . 

2.5 Quadratic Equations 
1 . 2 .  3 .  

4 . 5 . 6 . 
 

7 . 8 .  9 .  units 

2.6 Other Types of Equations 
1 . 2 . 3 . 

4 .   5 .  extraneous solution 6 .  extraneous solution 

7 .  8 . 9 . 

10 .  (  is not a solution). 

2.7 Linear Inequalities and Absolute Value Inequalities 
1 . 2 . ∞ ∞ 3 . 

4 . 5 . ∞ 6 . ∞

7 . ​ 8 . 9 . 



1302     Answer Key

10 .  or  in interval 
notation, this would be 
∞ ∞

2.1 Section Exercises 
1 . Answers may vary. Yes. It is 3 . The y-intercept is the point 5 . The x-intercept is  and 

possible for a point to be on where the graph crosses the the y-intercept is 
the x-axis or on the y-axis y-axis. 
and therefore is considered 
to NOT be in one of the 
quadrants. 

7 . The x-intercept is  and 9 . The x-intercept is  and 11 . 
the y-intercept is the y-intercept is 

13 . 15 . 17 . 

19 . 21 . 23 . 

25 . 27 . 29 . 

31 . 33 . 35 . 

1 

0 2 

3 3 

6 4 

not collinear 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     1303

37 . 39 . 41 . 
x y 

–3 0 

0 1.5 

3 3 

43 . 45 . 47 . 

49 . 51 . 53 . 

55 .  shorter 57 . 59 . Midpoint of each diagonal 
is the same point . 
Note this is a characteristic 
of rectangles, but not other 
quadrilaterals. 

61 . 37mi 63 . 54 ft 

2.2 Section Exercises 
1 . It means they have the 3 . The exponent of the 5 . If we insert either value into 

same slope. variable is 1. It is called a the equation, they make an 
first-degree equation. expression in the equation 

undefined (zero in the 
denominator). 

7 . 9 . 11 . 

13 . 15 . 17 .  

19 .  when we solve this 21 .  23 . 
we get  which is 
excluded, therefore NO 
solution 

25 . 27 . 29 . 

31 . 33 . 35 . 



1304     Answer Key

37 . 39 . 41 . 

Parallel Perpendicular 

43 . 45 .     47 . 
Answers may vary. 

49 . 51 . 53 . 
Answers may vary. 

Yes they are perpendicular. 

55 . 30 ft 57 . $57.50 59 . 220 mi 

2.3 Section Exercises 
1 . Answers may vary. Possible 3 . 5 . 

answers: We should define 
in words what our variable is 
representing. We should 
declare the variable. A 
heading. 

7 . Ann:  Beth: 9 . 11 . 300 min 

13 . 15 . 6 devices 17 . 

19 . 4 h 21 . She traveled for 2 h at 20 23 . $5,000 at 8% and $15,000 
mi/h, or 40 miles. at 12% 

25 . 27 . Plan A 29 . 

31 .  or 0.8 33 . 35 . 

37 . 39 . 41 . length = 360 ft; width = 160 
ft 

43 . 405 mi 45 . 47 . 28.7 

49 . 51 . 53 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     1305

2.4 Section Exercises 
1 . Add the real parts together 3 . Possible answer:  times 5 . 

and the imaginary parts equals -1, which is not 
together. imaginary. 

7 . 9 . 11 . 

13 . 15 . 17 . 

19 . 21 . 23 . 

25 . 27 . 25 29 . 

31 . 33 . 35 . 

37 . 39 . 41 . 

43 . 128i 45 . 47 . 

49 . 0 51 . 53 . 

55 . 

2.5 Section Exercises 
1 . It is a second-degree 3 . We want to take advantage 5 . One, when no linear term is 

equation (the highest of the zero property of present (no x term), such as 
variable exponent is 2). multiplication in the fact  Two, when the 

that if  then it must equation is already in the 
follow that each factor form 
separately offers a solution 
to the product being zero: 



1306     Answer Key

7 .  9 .  11 .  

13 .  15 . 17 .  

19 .  21 .  23 .  

25 .  27 . 29 .  

31 . 33 . Not real 35 . One rational 

37 . Two real; rational 39 . 41 . 

43 . 45 .  and 47 .  and 

49 . 51 .  7 ft. and 53 . maximum at 
17 ft. 

55 . The quadratic equation would be 57 . 3 feet 

The two values of  are 20 and 60. 

2.6 Section Exercises 
1 . This is not a solution to the 3 . They are probably trying to 5 . A rational exponent is a 

radical equation, it is a value enter negative 9, but taking fraction: the denominator of 
obtained from squaring the square root of  is not the fraction is the root or 
both sides and thus a real number. The negative index number and the 
changing the signs of an sign is in front of this, so numerator is the power to 
equation which has caused your friend should be taking which it is raised. 
it not to be a solution in the the square root of 9, cubing 
original equation. it, and then putting the 

negative sign in front, 
resulting in 

7 . 9 . 11 . 

13 . 15 . 17 . 

19 . 21 . 23 . 

25 . 27 . 29 . 

31 . 33 . 35 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     1307

37 . 39 . 41 . 

43 . 45 . 47 . 10 in. 

49 . 90 kg 

2.7 Section Exercises 
1 . When we divide both sides 3 . ∞ ∞ 5 . We start by finding the 

by a negative it changes the x-intercept, or where the 
sign of both sides so the function = 0. Once we have 
sense of the inequality sign that point, which is  we 
changes. graph to the right the 

straight line graph 
and then when we draw it to 
the left we plot positive y 
values, taking the absolute 
value of them. 

7 . ∞ 9 . ∞ 11 . ∞

13 . ∞ 15 . All real numbers ∞ ∞ 17 . ∞ ∞

19 . ∞ ∞ 21 . No solution 23 . 

25 . 27 . 

29 . 
  ∞

   
31 . ​ 33 . ∞ ∞

∞ ​ ∞



1308     Answer Key

35 . 37 . It is never less than zero. 39 . Where the blue line is 
No solution. above the orange line; 

point of intersection is 

∞

41 . Where the blue line is 43 . 45 . ∞
above the orange line; 
always. All real numbers. 
∞ ∞

47 . 49 . 51 . 

53 . ∞ 55 . Where the blue is below 57 . Where the blue is below 
the orange; always. All real the orange; 
numbers. ∞ ∞

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     1309

59 . 61 . 63 . 

Review Exercises 
1 . x-intercept: 3 . 5 . 

y-intercept: 

7 . 9 . midpoint is 11 . 
x y 

0 −2 

3 2 

6 6 

13 . 15 . 17 . No solution 

19 . 21 . 23 . females 17, males 56 

25 . 84 mi 27 . 29 . horizontal component 
vertical component 

31 . 33 . 35 . 

37 . 39 . 41 . 

43 . 45 . 47 . 

49 . 51 . 53 . 

55 . 57 . 59 . 

61 . ∞ 63 . 65 . No solution 



1310     Answer Key

67 . 69 . Where the blue is below 
the orange line; point of 
intersection is 

∞

Practice Test 
1 . 3 .  5 . ∞

x y 

0 2 

2 5 

4 8 

7 . 9 .  11 . 

13 . 15 . 17 . 

19 . 21 . 23 . 

25 . 27 . 29 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     1311

Chapter 3 
Try It 
3.1 Functions and Function Notation 
1 . ⓐ yes 2 . 3 . yes 

ⓑ  yes (Note: If two players 
had been tied for, say, 4th 
place, then the name would 
not have been a function of 
rank.) 

4 . 5 . 6 . 

7 . 8 .  or 9 . ⓐ  yes, because each bank 
account has a single balance 
at any given time; 
ⓑ  no, because several 
bank account numbers may 
have the same balance; 
ⓒ  no, because the same 
output may correspond to 
more than one input. 

10 . ⓐ  Yes, letter grade is a 11 . yes 12 . No, because it does not 
function of percent grade; pass the horizontal line 
ⓑ  No, it is not one-to-one. test. 
There are 100 different 
percent numbers we could 
get but only about five 
possible letter grades, so 
there cannot be only one 
percent number that 
corresponds to each letter 
grade. 

3.2 Domain and Range 
1 . 2 . ∞ ∞ 3 . ∞ ∞

4 . ∞ 5 . ⓐ  values that are less than 6 . domain =[1950,2002] range 
or equal to –2, or values that = [47,000,000,89,000,000] 
are greater than or equal to 
–1 and less than 3 
ⓑ 
ⓒ  ∞



1312     Answer Key

7 . domain: ∞  range: 8 . 

∞

3.3 Rates of Change and Behavior of Graphs 
1 . 2 . 3 . 

per year. 

4 . The local maximum appears to 
occur at  and the local 
minimum occurs at 
The function is increasing on 
∞ ∞  and 

decreasing on 

3.4 Composition of Functions 

1 . 2 . A gravitational force is still a 
force, so  makes 

No, the functions are not the same. sense as the acceleration of 
a planet at a distance r from 
the Sun (due to gravity), but 

 does not make 
sense. 

3 .  and 4 . 5 . ⓐ  8 ⓑ  20 

6 . ∞ 7 . Possible answer: 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     1313

3.5 Transformation of Functions 
1 . 2 . The graphs of  and  are 3 . 

shown below. The 
transformation is a horizontal 
shift. The function is shifted to 
the left by 2 units. 

4 . 5 . ⓐ 6 . ⓐ 

-2 0 2 4 

ⓑ 
ⓑ 

-2 0 2 4 

15 10 5 unknown 

7 . 8 . even 9 . 
2 4 6 8 

9 12 15 0 

Notice:  looks the 
same as  . 

10 . 11 .  so using the 
square root function we 
get 

3.6 Absolute Value Functions 
1 . using the variable  for 2 . 3 .  or 

passing, 



1314     Answer Key

3.7 Inverse Functions 
1 . 2 . Yes 3 . Yes 

4 . The domain of function 5 . ⓐ   In 60 6 . ⓐ  3 ⓑ  5.6 
is ∞  and the range minutes, 50 miles are 

traveled. 
of function  is ∞ ⓑ   To travel 

60 miles, it will take 70 
minutes. 

7 . 8 . 9 . 
∞
∞

3.1 Section Exercises 
1 . A relation is a set of ordered 3 . When a vertical line 5 . When a horizontal line 

pairs. A function is a special intersects the graph of a intersects the graph of a 
kind of relation in which no relation more than once, function more than once, 
two ordered pairs have the that indicates that for that that indicates that for that 
same first coordinate. input there is more than one output there is more than 

output. At any particular one input. A function is one-
input value, there can be to-one if each output 
only one output if the corresponds to only one 
relation is to be a function. input. 

7 . function 9 . function 11 . function 

13 . function 15 . function 17 . function 

19 . function 21 . function 23 . function 

25 . not a function 27 . 29 . 

31 .  33 . 35 . a.  b. 

37 . a.  b.  or 39 . ⓐ  41 . not a function 
ⓑ  ⓒ

43 . function 45 . function 47 . function 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     1315

49 . function 51 . function 53 . ⓐ  
ⓑ   or 

55 . not a function so it is also 57 . one-to- one function 59 . function, but not one-to-
not a one-to-one function one 

61 . function 63 . function 65 . not a function 

67 . 69 . 

71 .   

73 . 75 . 20 

77 . 79 . 81 . 

83 . 85 . 87 . 

89 . ⓐ  91 . ⓐ  The height of a rocket 
ⓑ  The number of cubic above ground after 1 
yards of dirt required for a second is 200 ft. 
garden of 100 square feet ⓑ  The height of a rocket 
is 1. above ground after 2 

seconds is 350 ft. 



1316     Answer Key

3.2 Section Exercises 
1 . The domain of a function 3 . There is no restriction on 5 . Graph each formula of the 

depends upon what values for  because you piecewise function over its 
of the independent variable can take the cube root of corresponding domain. Use 
make the function any real number. So the the same scale for the 
undefined or imaginary. domain is all real numbers, -axis and  -axis for each 

∞ ∞  When dealing with graph. Indicate inclusive 
endpoints with a solid circle 

the set of real numbers, you and exclusive endpoints 
cannot take the square root with an open circle. Use an 
of negative numbers. So 
-values are restricted for arrow to indicate ∞  or ∞

 to nonnegative Combine the graphs to find 
numbers and the domain is the graph of the piecewise 

∞ function. 

7 . ∞ ∞ 9 . ∞ 11 . ∞ ∞

13 . ∞ ∞ 15 . ∞ ∞ 17 . ∞ ∞

19 . ∞ ∞ 21 . ∞ 23 . ∞

25 . ∞ ∞ 27 . domain:  range 29 . domain:  range: 

31 . domain:  range: 33 . domain: ∞  range: 35 . domain: 
∞  range: 

37 . domain: ∞  range: 39 . domain: ∞ ∞ 41 . domain: ∞ ∞
∞

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     1317

43 . domain: ∞ ∞ 45 . domain: ∞ ∞

47 . 49 . 

51 . 53 . domain: ∞ ∞

55 . 57 . 59 . Many answers. One 
function is 

window:  range: 

window:  range: 

61 . ⓐ  The fixed cost is $500. 
ⓑ  The cost of making 25 
items is $750. 
ⓒ  The domain is [0, 100] 
and the range is [500, 
1500]. 



1318     Answer Key

3.3 Section Exercises 
1 . Yes, the average rate of 3 . The absolute maximum and 5 . 

change of all linear minimum relate to the 
functions is constant. entire graph, whereas the 

local extrema relate only to 
a specific region around an 
open interval. 

7 . 3 9 . 11 . 

13 . 15 . 17 . 

19 . increasing on 21 . increasing on 23 . local maximum: 
∞ ∞ ∞ local minimum: 

decreasing on decreasing on 
∞

25 . absolute maximum at 27 . ⓐ  –3000 ⓑ  –1250 29 . -4 
approximately 
absolute minimum at 
approximately 

31 . 27 33 . –0.167 35 . Local minimum at 
decreasing on ∞
increasing on ∞

37 . Local minimum at 39 . Local maximum at 41 . A 
 decreasing on  local minima 
 increasing on at  and 

∞  decreasing on 
∞

increasing on 
∞

43 . 45 . 2.7 gallons per minute 47 . approximately –0.6 
milligrams per day 

3.4 Section Exercises 
1 . Find the numbers that make 3 . Yes. Sample answer: Let 

the function in the  Then 
denominator  equal to 
zero, and check for any and 
other domain restrictions on 

 and  such as an even- So 
indexed root or zeros in the 
denominator. 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     1319

5 .  domain: 7 . 9 . 
∞ ∞ domain: ∞ ∞ domain: ∞

 domain: 
∞ ∞

domain: ∞ ∞ domain: ∞
 domain: 

domain: ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ domain: ∞
 domain:  domain: 

∞ ∞
domain: ∞ ∞ ∞

11 . ⓐ 13. 

ⓑ  
ⓒ  
ⓓ
ⓔ  

15 . 17 . 

19 . 21 . ⓐ  23 . ⓐ  ∞
ⓑ  ∞ ⓑ ∞ ∞

ⓒ  ∞

25 . ∞ 27 . sample: 29 . sample: 

31 . sample: 33 . sample: 35 . sample: 

37 . sample: 39 . sample: 41 . sample: 

43 . 2 45 . 5 47 . 4 

49 . 0 51 . 2 53 . 1 

55 . 4 57 . 4 59 . 9 

61 . 4 63 . 2 65 . 3 

67 . 11 69 . 0 71 . 7 

73 . 75 . 77 . 

79 . 81 . 2 83 . ∞ ∞

85 . False 87 .  ; 89 . 



1320     Answer Key

91 . c 93 .  and 95 . 
square units 

square inches 

97 . ⓐ 
ⓑ  3.38 hours 

3.5 Section Exercises 
1 . A horizontal shift results 3 . A horizontal compression 5 . For a function  substitute 

when a constant is added to results when a constant  for  in 
or subtracted from the greater than 1 is multiplied Simplify. If the resulting 
input. A vertical shifts by the input. A vertical function is the same as the 
results when a constant is compression results when a original function, 
added to or subtracted from constant between 0 and 1 is  then the 
the output. multiplied by the output. function is even. If the 

resulting function is the 
opposite of the original 
function, 
then the original function is 
odd. If the function is not 
the same or the opposite, 
then the function is neither 
odd nor even. 

7 . 9 . 11 . The graph of  is a 
horizontal shift to the left 
43 units of the graph of 

13 . The graph of  is a 15 . The graph of  is a 17 . The graph of  is a 
horizontal shift to the right vertical shift up 8 units of vertical shift down 7 units 
4 units of the graph of the graph of of the graph of 

19 . The graph of 21 . decreasing on ∞ 23 . decreasing on ∞
is a horizontal shift to the 
left 4 units and a vertical and increasing on ∞
shift down 1 unit of the 
graph of 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     1321

25 . 27 . 29 . 

31 . 33 . 35 . 

37 . 39 . 41 . 

43 . 45 . 47 . even 

49 . odd 51 . even 53 . The graph of  is a vertical 
reflection (across the 
-axis) of the graph of 

55 . The graph of  is a vertical 57 . The graph of  is a 59 . The graph of  is a 
stretch by a factor of 4 of horizontal compression by horizontal stretch by a 
the graph of a factor of  of the graph factor of 3 of the graph of 

of 

61 . The graph of  is a 63 . 65 . 
horizontal reflection across 
the  -axis and a vertical 
stretch by a factor of 3 of 
the graph of 



1322     Answer Key

67 . 69 . The graph of the function 71 . The graph of  is 
 is shifted to the left 1 stretched vertically by a factor 

unit, stretched vertically by a of 2, shifted horizontally 4 units 
factor of 4, and shifted down 5 to the right, reflected across the 
units. horizontal axis, and then 

shifted vertically 3 units up. 

73 . The graph of the function 75 . The graph of the function is 77 . The graph of  is 
 is compressed stretched horizontally by a shifted right 4 units and then 

vertically by a factor of factor of 3 and then shifted reflected across the vertical line 
vertically downward by 3 units. 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     1323

79 . 81 . 

3.6 Section Exercises 
1 . Isolate the absolute value 3 . The graph of the absolute 5 . The distance from x to 8 can 

term so that the equation is value function does not be represented using the 
of the form  Form cross the  -axis, so the absolute value statement: ∣ 
one equation by setting the graph is either completely x − 8 ∣ = 4. 
expression inside the above or completely below 
absolute value symbol, the  -axis. 
equal to the expression on 
the other side of the 
equation,  Form a second 
equation by setting  equal 
to the opposite of the 
expression on the other side 
of the equation,  Solve 
each equation for the 
variable. 

7 . ∣ x − 10 ∣ ≥ 15 9 . There are no x-intercepts. 11 . (−4, 0) and (2, 0) 

13 . 15 . 17 . 

19 . 21 . 23 . 



1324     Answer Key

25 . 27 . 29 . 

31 . 33 . range: 35 . 

37 . There is no solution for 39 . 41 . 
that will keep the function 
from having a  -intercept. 
The absolute value 
function always crosses the 

 -intercept when 

3.7 Section Exercises 
1 . Each output of a function 3 . Yes. For example, 5 . Given a function 

must have exactly one is its own inverse. solve for  in terms of 
output for the function to be Interchange the  and 
one-to-one. If any horizontal Solve the new equation for 
line crosses the graph of a  The expression for  is the 
function more than once, inverse, 
that means that  -values 
repeat and the function is 
not one-to-one. If no 
horizontal line crosses the 
graph of the function more 
than once, then no  -values 
repeat and the function is 
one-to-one. 

7 . 9 . 11 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     1325

13 . domain of 15. domain of 16 . ⓐ  and 
∞ ∞

ⓑ This tells us that  and 
 are inverse functions 

17 . 19 . one-to-one 21 . one-to-one 

23 . not one-to-one 25 . 27 . 

29 . 31 . 33 . 

35 . 37 . 39 . 

41 . 43 . 45 . 
1 4 7 12 16 Given the Fahrenheit 
3 6 9 13 14 temperature,  this 

formula allows you to 
calculate the Celsius 
temperature. 

47 .  
The time for the car to 
travel 180 miles is 3.6 
hours. 

Review Exercises 
1 . function 3 . not a function 5 .  

7 . one-to-one 9 . function 11 . function 



1326     Answer Key

13 . 15 . 17 .  or 

19 . 21 . ∞ ∞ 23 . 

25 . 27 . increasing ∞ 29 . increasing 

decreasing ∞ constant 
∞ ∞

31 . local minimum 33 . 
local maximum 

35 . 37 . 

39 . 41 . 43 . sample: 

45 . 47 . 49 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     1327

51 . 53 . 55 . 

57 . even 59 . odd 61 . even 

63 . 65 . 67 . 

69 . 71 . 73 . The function is one-to-one. 

75 . 

Practice Test 
1 . The relation is a function. 3 . −16 5 . The graph is a parabola and 

the graph fails the 
horizontal line test. 

7 . 9 . 11 . 



1328     Answer Key

13 . 15 . 17 . 

19 . 21 . ∞ ∞ 23 . 

25 . 27 . 29 . 

31 . yes 33 . 

Chapter 4 
Try It 
4.1 Linear Functions 

1 . 2 . 
decreasing because 

3 . 4 . 5 . 

6 . Possible answers include 7 . 8 . 
  or 

9 . ⓐ  10 . 
ⓑ  

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     1329

4.2 Modeling with Linear Functions 
1 . ⓐ  2 . ⓐ 41,100 ⓑ 2020 3 . 21.57 miles 

ⓑ  The y-intercept is 
. If the company 

does not produce a single 
doughnut, they still incur a 
cost of $25,000. 

4.3 Fitting Linear Models to Data 
1 . 2 . 150.871 billion gallons; 

extrapolation 

4.1 Section Exercises 
1 . Terry starts at an elevation 3 . 5 . The point of intersection is 

of 3000 feet and descends  This is because for 
70 feet per second. the horizontal line, all of the 

 coordinates are  and for 
the vertical line, all of the 
coordinates are  The point 
of intersection is on both 
lines and therefore will have 
these two characteristics. 

7 . Yes 9 . Yes 11 . No 

13 . Yes 15 . Increasing 17 . Decreasing 

19 . Decreasing 21 . Increasing 23 . Decreasing 

25 . 2 27 . –2 29 . 

31 . 33 . 35 . 

37 . perpendicular 39 . parallel 41 . 

43 . 45 . 47 . Line 1: m = –10 Line 2: m = 
–10 Parallel 

49 . Line 1: m = –2 Line 2: m = 1 51 . 
Neither 



1330     Answer Key

53 . 55 . 57 . 0 

59 . 61 . 63 . 

65 . F 67 . C 69 . A 

71 . 73 . 75 . 

77 . 79 . 81 . 

83 . 85 . 87 . 

89 . Linear, 91 . Linear, 93 . Linear, 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     1331

95 . Linear, 97 . 99 . 

101. ⓐ 103 . 105 . 

ⓑ  

107. 109 . 111 . 

113. 115 . $45 per training session. 117 . The rate of change is 0.1. 
For every additional 
minute talked, the 
monthly charge increases 
by $0.1 or 10 cents. The 
initial value is 24. When 
there are no minutes 
talked, initially the charge 
is $24. 

119. The slope is –400. this 121 . C 
means for every year 
between 1960 and 1989, 
the population dropped 
by 400 per year in the city. 

4.2 Section Exercises 
1 . Determine the independent 3 . To determine the initial 5 . 6 square units 

variable. This is the variable value, find the output when 
upon which the output the input is equal to zero. 
depends. 

7 . 20.01 square units 9 . 2,300 11 . 64,170 



1332     Answer Key

13 . 15 . (–30, 0) Thirty years before 17 . Ten years after the model 
the start of this model, the began 
town had no citizens. (0, 
75,000) Initially, the town 
had a population of 75,000. 

19 . 21 .  : The x-intercept is 23 . At age 5.8 months 
not a plausible set of data 
for this model because it 
means the baby weighed 0 
pounds 15 months prior to 
birth.  : The baby 
weighed 7.5 pounds at 
birth. 

25 . 27 .  In roughly 59 29 . 2063 
years, the number of 
people inflicted with the 
common cold would be 0. 

 Initially there 
were 12,025 people 
afflicted by the common 
cold. 

31 . 33 . In 2070, the company’s 35 . 
profit will be zero. 

37 . (10, 0) In the year 1990, the 39 . Hawaii 41 . During the year 1933 
company’s profits were 
zero 

43 . $105,620 45 . ⓐ 696 people ⓑ 4 years 47 . ⓐ C(x) = 0.15x + 10 
ⓒ 174 people per year ⓑ The flat monthly fee is 
ⓓ 305 people $10 and there is a $0.15 fee 
ⓔ P(t) = 305 + 174t for each additional minute 

ⓕ 2,219 people used 
ⓒ $113.05 

49 . ⓐ  51 . ⓐ  53 . More than 133 minutes 
ⓑ  6,640 moose ⓑ  5.5 billion cubic feet 

ⓒ  During the year 2017 

55 . More than $42,857.14 57 . More than $66,666.67 in 
worth of jewelry sales 

4.3 Section Exercises 
1 . When our model no longer 3 . We predict a value outside 5 . The closer the number is to 

applies, after some value in the domain and range of the 1, the less scattered the 
the domain, the model itself data. data, the closer the number 
doesn’t hold. is to 0, the more scattered 

the data. 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     1333

7 . 61.966 years 9 . 11 . 

No. No. 

13 . 15 . 

Interpolation. About 

17 . 19 . 

21 . 23 . Yes, trend appears linear 25 . 
because  and will 
exceed 12,000 near 
midyear, 2016, 24.6 years 
since 1992. 

27 . 29 . 31 . 

33 . 35 .  If 18,980 units 
Yes, the function is a good fit. are sold, the company will 

have a profit of zero 
dollars. 

37 . 39 . 41 . 



1334     Answer Key

Review Exercises 
1 . Yes 3 . Increasing 5 . 

7 . 3 9 . 11 . Not linear. 

13 . parallel 15 . 17 . Line 1:  Line 2: 
 Parallel 

19 . 21 . 23 . More than 250 

25 . 118,000 27 . 29 . ⓐ  800 
ⓑ  100 students per year 
ⓒ

31 . 18,500 33 . $91,625 35 . Extrapolation 

37 . 39 . 2023 41 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     1335

43 . 2027 45 . 7,660 

Practice Test 
1 . Yes 3 . Increasing 5 . y = −1.5x − 6 

7 . y = −2x − 1 9 . No 11 . Perpendicular 

13 . (−7, 0); (0, −2) 15 . y = −0.25x + 12 17 . 

Slope = −1 and y-intercept = 6 

19 . 150 21 . 165,000 23 . y = 875x + 10,625 

25 . ⓐ 375 27 . 29 . In early 2018 
ⓑ dropped an average of 
46.875, or about 47 people 
per year 
ⓒ y = −46.875t + 1250 

31 . y = 0.00455x + 1979.5 33 . r = 0.999 

Chapter 5 
Try It 
5.1 Quadratic Functions 
1 . The path passes through the 2 .  in 3 . The domain is all real 

origin and has vertex at general form; numbers. The range is 
 so  in  or ∞

 To standard form 
make the shot, 
would need to be about 4 
but  he 
doesn’t make it. 

4 . y-intercept at (0, 13), No 5 . ⓐ 3 seconds ⓑ 256 feet 
intercepts ⓒ 7 seconds 



1336     Answer Key

5.2 Power Functions and Polynomial Functions 
1 .  is a power function 2 . As  approaches positive or 3 . The degree is 6. The leading 

because it can be written as negative infinity, term is  The leading 
 The other decreases without bound: as coefficient is 

functions are not power ∞ ∞
functions. because of the negative 

coefficient. 

4 . As 5 . The leading term is 
∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ so it is a degree 3 

polynomial. As 
It has the shape of an even degree power approaches positive infinity, 
function with a negative coefficient.  increases without 

bound; as  approaches 
negative infinity, 
decreases without bound. 

6 . y-intercept 7 . There are at most 12 8 . The end behavior indicates 
x-intercepts intercepts and at most 11 an odd-degree polynomial 
and turning points. function; there are 3 

intercepts and 2 turning 
points, so the degree is odd 
and at least 3. Because of 
the end behavior, we know 
that the lead coefficient 
must be negative. 

9 . The  intercepts are 
 and  the 

y-intercept is  and the 
graph has at most 2 turning 
points. 

5.3 Graphs of Polynomial Functions 
1 . y-intercept 2 . The graph has a zero of –5 3 . 

x-intercepts with multiplicity 3, a zero of 
 and -1 with multiplicity 2, and a 

zero of 3 with multiplicity 4. 

4 . Because  is a polynomial 5 . 6 . The minimum occurs at 
function and since  is approximately the point 
negative and  is  and the maximum 
positive, there is at least one occurs at approximately the 
real zero between  and point 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     1337

5.4 Dividing Polynomials 
1 . 2 . 3 . 

5.5 Zeros of Polynomial Functions 
1 . 2 . The zeros are 2, –2, and –4. 3 . There are no rational zeros. 

4 . The zeros are 5 . 6 . There must be 4, 2, or 0 
positive real roots and 0 
negative real roots. The 
graph shows that there are 
2 positive real zeros and 0 
negative real zeros. 

7 . 3 meters by 4 meters by 7 
meters 

5.6 Rational Functions 
1 . End behavior: as 2 . 3 . 

∞  Local 
behavior: as 

∞  (there are 
no x- or y-intercepts) 

The function and the 
asymptotes are shifted 3 units 
right and 4 units down. As 

∞  and as 
∞

The function is 

4 . The domain is all real 5 . Removable discontinuity at 6 . Vertical asymptotes at 
numbers except  and  Vertical asymptotes: and  horizontal 

asymptote at 



1338     Answer Key

7 . For the transformed reciprocal squared function, we find the 8 . Horizontal asymptote at 
rational form. Vertical asymptotes at 

 y-intercept at 

Because the numerator is the same degree as the denominator x-intercepts at 
we know that as ∞  is the   is a 
horizontal asymptote. Next, we set the denominator equal to zero with multiplicity 2, and the 
zero, and find that the vertical asymptote is  because as graph bounces off the x-axis at 

∞  We then set the numerator equal to 0 and this point.  is a single zero 
and the graph crosses the axis 

find the x-intercepts are at  and  Finally, we at this point. 
evaluate the function at 0 and find the y-intercept to be at 

5.7 Inverses and Radical Functions 
1 . 2 . 

and 

3 . 4 . 5 . 

5.8 Modeling Using Variation 
1 . 2 . 3 . 

5.1 Section Exercises 
1 . When written in that form, 3 . If  then the function 5 . If possible, we can use 

the vertex can be easily becomes a linear function. factoring. Otherwise, we can 
identified. use the quadratic formula. 

7 .  Vertex 9 . 11 . 
Vertex Vertex 

13 . 15 . Minimum is  and 17 . Minimum is  and 
Vertex occurs at  Axis of occurs at  Axis of 

symmetry is symmetry is 

19 . Minimum is  and occurs 21 . Domain is ∞ ∞ 23 . Domain is ∞ ∞  Range 
at  Axis of symmetry is Range is ∞ is ∞

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     1339

25 . Domain is ∞ ∞  Range 27 . 29 . 

is ∞

31 . 33 . 35 . Vertex: (3, −10), axis of 
symmetry: x = 3, intercepts: 

 and 

37 . Vertex: , axis of 39 . Vertex: , axis of 41 . 
symmetry: , y-intercept: symmetry: , intercept: 

, x-intercepts:  and 

43 . 45 . 47 . 

49 . 50 . 53 . The graph is shifted to the 
right or left (a horizontal 
shift). 

55 . The suspension bridge has 57 . Domain is ∞ ∞  Range 59 . Domain: ∞ ∞  ; range: 
1,000 feet distance from 
the center. is ∞ ∞

61 . 63 . 65 . 



1340     Answer Key

67 . 75 feet by 50 feet 69 . 3 and 3; product is 9 71 . The revenue reaches the 
maximum value when 1800 
thousand phones are 
produced. 

73 . 2.449 seconds 75 . 41 trees per acre 

5.2 Section Exercises 
1 . The coefficient of the power 3 . As  decreases without 5 . The polynomial function is 

function is the real number bound, so does  As of even degree and leading 
that is multiplied by the increases without bound, so coefficient is negative. 
variable raised to a power. does 
The degree is the highest 
power appearing in the 
function. 

7 . Power function 9 . Neither 11 . Neither 

13 . Degree = 2, Coefficient = –2 15 . Degree =4, Coefficient = –2 17 . As ∞ , 
∞ ∞ ∞

19 . As ∞ , 21 . As ∞ , 
∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞

23 . As ∞ , 25 . y-intercept is 27 . y-intercept is 
∞ ∞ ∞ t-intercepts are x-intercepts are  and 

29 . y-intercept is 31 . 3 33 . 5 
x-intercepts are 

 and 

35 . 3 37 . 5 39 . Yes. Number of turning 
points is 2. Least possible 
degree is 3. 

41 . Yes. Number of turning 43 . Yes. Number of turning 45 . Yes. Number of turning 
points is 1. Least possible points is 0. Least possible points is 0. Least possible 
degree is 2. degree is 1. degree is 1. 

47 . 49 . 

10 9,500 10 –504 

100 99,950,000 100 –941,094 

–10 9,500 –10 1,716 

–100 99,950,000 –100 1,061,106 

As ∞ , As ∞ , 
∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     1341

51 . 53 . 

The  intercept is  The The  intercept is  . The 
intercepts are  As intercepts are 

∞ ,  As 

∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ , 
∞ ∞ ∞

55 . 57. 

The  intercept is  The The  intercept is  The 
intercept is  intercept are 

As ∞ , 
∞ , ∞ ∞ ∞
∞ ∞ ∞



1342     Answer Key

59 . 61. 63 . 

The  intercept is  The 
intercepts are 

 As 
∞ , 
∞ ∞ ∞

65 . 67 . 69 . 

5.3 Section Exercises 
1 . The  intercept is where the 3 . If we evaluate the function 5 . There will be a factor raised 

graph of the function at  and at  and the sign of to an even power. 
crosses the  axis, and the the function value changes, 
zero of the function is the then we know a zero exists 
input value for which between  and 

7 . 9 . 11 . 

13 . 15 . 17 . 

19 . 21 . 23 . 

25 .  and 27 .  and 29 .  and 
Sign change confirms. Sign change confirms.  Sign 

change confirms. 

31 . 0 with multiplicity 2, 33 . 0 with multiplicity 2, –2 35 .  with multiplicity 5, 5 
with multiplicity 5, 4 with with multiplicity 2 with multiplicity 2 
multiplicity 2 

37 . 0 with multiplicity 4, 2 with 39 .  with multiplicity 2, 0 with 
multiplicity 1, −1 with multiplicity 3 
multiplicity 1 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     1343

41 . 43 . x-intercepts,  with multiplicity 2, 
with multiplicity 1,  intercept  As 

∞ ∞ ∞ ∞

45 . x-intercepts  with multiplicity 3, 47 . x-intercepts  with 
with multiplicity 2,  intercept  As multiplicity 1,  intercept  As 

∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞

49 . 51 . 53 . –4, –2, 1, 3 with multiplicity 
1 

55 . –2, 3 each with multiplicity 57 . 59 . 
2 

61 . 63 . 65 . 

67 . local max 69 . global min 71 . global min 
local min 

73 . 75. 77. 

79 . 



1344     Answer Key

5.4 Section Exercises 
1 . The binomial is a factor of 3 . 

the polynomial. 

5 . 7 . 

9 . ​ 11 . 

13 . 15 . 

17 . 19 . 21 . 

23 . 25 . 27 . 

29 . 31 . 33 . 

35 . 37 . 39 . Yes 

41 . Yes 43 . No 45 . 

47 . 49 . 

51 . 53 . 

55 . 57 . 59 . 

61 . 63 . 65 . 

67 . 69 . 71 . 

73 . 

5.5 Section Exercises 
1 . The theorem can be used to 3 . Rational zeros can be 5 . Polynomial functions can 

evaluate a polynomial. expressed as fractions have repeated zeros, so the 
whereas real zeros include fact that number is a zero 
irrational numbers. doesn’t preclude it being a 

zero again. 

7 . 9 . 11 . 

13 . 15 . 17 . 

19 . 21 . 23 . 

25 . 27 . 29 . 

31 . 33 . 35 . 

37 . 39 . 41 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     1345

43 . 45 . 47 . 1 positive, 1 negative 

49 . 3 or 1 positive, 0 negative 51 . 0 positive, 3 or 1 negative 53 . 2 or 0 positive, 2 or 0 
negative 

55 . 2 or 0 positive, 2 or 0 negative 57 . 59 . 

61 . 63 . 65 . 

67 . 69 . 71 . 8 by 4 by 6 inches 

73 . 5.5 by 4.5 by 3.5 inches 75 . 8 by 5 by 3 inches 77 . Radius = 6 meters, Height = 
2 meters 

79 . Radius = 2.5 meters, Height 
= 4.5 meters 



1346     Answer Key

5.6 Section Exercises 
1 . The rational function will be 3 . The numerator and 5 . Yes. The numerator of the 

represented by a quotient of denominator must have a formula of the functions 
polynomial functions. common factor. would have only complex 

roots and/or factors 
common to both the 
numerator and 
denominator. 

7 . 9 . 11 . V.A. at  H.A. at 
 Domain is all reals 

13 . V.A. at  H.A. at 15 . V.A. at  H.A. 17 . V.A. at  H.A. at 
 Domain is all reals at  Domain is all reals Domain is all reals 

19 . V.A. at  H.A. at 21 . none 23 . 
 Domain is all reals 

25 . Local behavior: 27 . Local behavior: 
∞ ∞ ∞ ∞

End behavior: ∞ End behavior: ∞

29 . Local behavior: ∞ 31 . 
∞ ∞ ∞

End behavior: ∞

33 . 35 . 37 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     1347

39 . 41 . 

43 . 



1348     Answer Key

45 . 47 . 

49 . 51 . 

53 . 55 . 57 . 

59 . 61 . 63 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     1349

65 . 67 . 
2.01 2.001 2.0001 1.99 1.999 –4.1 –4.01 –4.001 –3.99 –3.999 

100 1,000 10,000 –100 –1,000 82 802 8,002 –798 –7998 

10 100 1,000 10,000 100,000 10 100 1,000 10,000 100,000 

.125 .0102 .001 .0001 .00001 1.4286 1.9331 1.992 1.9992 1.999992 

Vertical asymptote  Horizontal Vertical asymptote  Horizontal 
asymptote asymptote 

69 . 71 . ∞
–.9 –.99 –.999 –1.1 –1.01 

81 9,801 998,001 121 10,201 

10 100 1,000 10,000 100,000 

.82645 .9803 .998 .9998 

Vertical asymptote  Horizontal 
asymptote 

73 . ∞ 75 . 77 . 

79 . 81 . 83 . After about 6.12 hours. 

85 .  2 by 2 87 .  Radius 
by 5 feet. = 2.52 meters. 

5.7 Section Exercises 
1 . It can be too difficult or 3 . We will need a restriction on 5 . 

impossible to solve for  in the domain of the answer. 
terms of 

7 . 9 . 11 . 



1350     Answer Key

13 . 15 . 17 . ∞

19 . 21 . 23 . 

25 . 27 . 29 . 

31 . 33 . 35 . 

37 . 39 . 41 . 

43 . 45 . 47 . 

49 . 51 . 53 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     1351

55 . 57 .  , 3.54 59 .  8.92 in. 
seconds 

61 .  3.26 63 .  –2, 3.99 ft 65 .  ≈ 5.64 ft 
ft 

5.8 Section Exercises 
1 . The graph will have the 3 . No. Multiple variables may 5 . 

appearance of a power jointly vary. 
function. 

7 . 9 . 11 . 

13 . 15 . 17 . 

19 . 21 . 23 . 

25 . 27 . 29 . 

31 . 33 . 35 . 

37 . 39 . 41 . 

43 . 45 . 47 . 1.89 years 

49 . 0.61 years 51 . 3 seconds 53 . 48 inches 

55 . 49.75 pounds 57 . 33.33 amperes 59 . 2.88 inches 



1352     Answer Key

Review Exercises 
1 . 3 . 

5 . 300 meters by 150 meters, 7 . Yes, degree = 5, leading 9 . Yes, degree = 4, leading 
the longer side parallel to coefficient = 4 coefficient = 1 
river. 

11 . ∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ 13 . –3 with multiplicity 2, 
with multiplicity 1, –1 with 
multiplicity 3 

15 . 4 with multiplicity 1 17 .  with multiplicity 1, 3 with 19 .  with remainder 12 
multiplicity 3 

21 . 23 .  , so factored 25 . 
form is 

27 . 29 . 0 or 2 positive, 1 negative 31 . Intercepts  , 
Asymptotes  and 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     1353

33 . Intercepts (3, 0), (-3, 0), and 35 . 37 . 
, Asymptotes 

39 . 41 . 43 . 

45 . 47 . 148.5 pounds 

Practice Test 
1 . Degree: 5, leading 3 . 

coefficient: −2 

5 . 7 . 3 with multiplicity 3,  with 9 .  with multiplicity 3, 2 
multiplicity 1, 1 with with multiplicity 2 
multiplicity 2 

11 . 13 . 15 . 1, −2, and −  (multiplicity 
2) 

17 . 19 . 2 or 0 positive, 1 negative 21 . 

23 . 25 . 27 . 



1354     Answer Key

Chapter 6 
Try It 
6.1 Exponential Functions 
1 .  and 2 . 3 . About  billion people; 

 represent by the year 2031, India’s 
exponential functions. population will exceed 

China’s by about 0.001 
billion, or 1 million people. 

4 .  and 5 . 6 .  Answers 
may vary due to round-off 
error. The answer should be 
very close to 

7 . 8 . about $3,644,675.88 9 . $13,693 

10 . 11 . $3,659,823.44 12 . 3.77E-26 (This is calculator 
notation for the number 
written as  in 
scientific notation. While 
the output of an 
exponential function is 
never zero, this number is 
so close to zero that for all 
practical purposes we can 
accept zero as the answer.) 

6.2 Graphs of Exponential Functions 
1 . The domain is ∞ ∞  the 2 . The domain is ∞ ∞  the 3 . 

range is ∞  the horizontal range is ∞  the horizontal 
asymptote is asymptote is 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     1355

4 . The domain is ∞ ∞  the 5 . The domain is ∞ ∞  the 6 .  the 

range is ∞  the horizontal range is ∞  the horizontal domain is ∞ ∞  the 

asymptote is asymptote is range is ∞  the 
horizontal asymptote is 

6.3 Logarithmic Functions 
1 . ⓐ  is 2 . ⓐ   is equivalent to 3 .  (recalling 

equivalent to 
that  ) 

ⓑ   is equivalent 
ⓑ  is to 
equivalent to ⓒ   is equivalent to 

4 . 5 . 6 . 

7 . The difference in 8 . It is not possible to take the 
magnitudes was about logarithm of a negative 

number in the set of real 
numbers. 

6.4 Graphs of Logarithmic Functions 
1 . ∞ 2 . ∞ 3 . 

The domain is ∞  the 

range is ∞ ∞  and the 
vertical asymptote is 



1356     Answer Key

4 . 5 . 6 . 

The domain is ∞  the The domain is ∞  the 

range ∞ ∞  and the range is ∞ ∞  and the 
asymptote The domain is ∞  the vertical asymptote is 

range is ∞ ∞  and the 
vertical asymptote is 

7 . 8 . 9 . 

The domain is ∞  the 

range is ∞ ∞  and the 

The domain is ∞  the vertical asymptote is 

range is ∞ ∞  and the 
vertical asymptote is 

10 . 11 . 

6.5 Logarithmic Properties 
1 . 2 . 

3 . 4 . 5 . 

6 . 7 . 

8 . 9 .  can also be 
written  by reducing 
the fraction to lowest terms. 

10 . 11 .  this answer 12 . The pH increases by about 
could also be written 0.301. 

13 . 14 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     1357

6.6 Exponential and Logarithmic Equations 
1 . 2 . 3 . 

4 . The equation has no 5 . 6 .  or 
solution. 

7 . 8 . 9 . 

10 . 11 . 12 .  or 

13 . 

6.7 Exponential and Logarithmic Models 
1 . 2 . less than 230 years, 3 . 

229.3157 to be exact 

4 . 6.026 hours 5 . 895 cases on day 15 6 . Exponential. 

7 . 

6.8 Fitting Exponential Models to Data 
1 . ⓐ  The exponential regression 2 . ⓐ  The logarithmic regression model 

model that fits these data is that fits these data is 

ⓑ  If spending continues at this ⓑ  If sales continue at this rate, about 
rate, the graduate’s credit card 171,000 games will be sold in the year 
debt will be $4,499.38 after one 2015. 
year. 

3 . ⓐ  The logistic regression model 
that fits these data is 

ⓑ  If the population continues 
to grow at this rate, there will be 
about  seals in 2020. 
ⓒ  To the nearest whole 
number, the carrying capacity is 
25,657. 



1358     Answer Key

6.1 Section Exercises 
1 . Linear functions have a 3 . When interest is 5 . exponential; the population 

constant rate of change. compounded, the decreases by a proportional 
Exponential functions percentage of interest rate. . 
increase based on a percent earned to principal ends up 
of the original. being greater than the 

annual percentage rate for 
the investment account. 
Thus, the annual percentage 
rate does not necessarily 
correspond to the real 
interest earned, which is the 
very definition of nominal. 

7 . not exponential; the charge 9 . The forest represented by 11 . After  years, forest A 
decreases by a constant the function will have  more trees 
amount each visit, so the than forest B. 
statement represents a 
linear function. . 

13 . Answers will vary. Sample 15 . exponential growth; The 17 . exponential decay; The 
response: For a number of growth factor,  is decay factor,  is 
years, the population of greater than between  and 
forest A will increasingly 
exceed forest B, but 
because forest B actually 
grows at a faster rate, the 
population will eventually 
become larger than forest 
A and will remain that way 
as long as the population 
growth models hold. Some 
factors that might 
influence the long-term 
validity of the exponential 
growth model are drought, 
an epidemic that culls the 
population, and other 
environmental and 
biological factors. 

19 . 21 . 23 . Linear 

25 . Neither 27 . Linear 29 . 

31 . 33 . 35 . 

37 . 39 . continuous growth; the 41 . continuous decay; the 
growth rate is greater than growth rate is less than 

43 . 45 . 47 . 

49 . 51 . 53 . 

55 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     1359

57 . 

59 . Let  be the exponential decay function  such 61 .  fox 
that  Then for some number 

63 .  65 . 67 .  

6.2 Section Exercises 
1 . An asymptote is a line that 3 .  y-intercept: 5 . 

the graph of a function  Domain: all real y-intercept:  Domain: 
approaches, as  either numbers; Range: all real all real numbers; Range: all 
increases or decreases numbers greater than real numbers less than 
without bound. The 
horizontal asymptote of an 
exponential function tells us 
the limit of the function’s 
values as the independent 
variable gets either 
extremely large or 
extremely small. 

7 .  y-intercept: 9 . 11 . 
 Domain: all real 

numbers; Range: all real 
numbers greater than 

y-intercept: 

13 . B 15 . A 17 . E 

19 . D 21 . C 23 . 



1360     Answer Key

25 . 27 . 29 . As ∞  , ∞  ; 
As ∞  , 

Horizontal asymptote: 
 Domain: all real 

numbers; Range: all real 
numbers strictly greater than 

31 . As ∞  ,  ; 33 . 35 . 
As ∞  , ∞

37 . 39 . 41 . 

43 . 45 . 47 . 

49 . 51 . The graph of 53 . The graphs of  and 
is the refelction about the  are the same and are 
y-axis of the graph of a horizontal shift to the 

 For any real right of the graph of 
number  and function For any real number n, real 

 the graph of number  and 
 is the the reflection function  the 

about the y-axis, graph of  is the 
horizontal shift 

6.3 Section Exercises 
1 . A logarithm is an exponent. 3 . Since the equation of a 5 . The natural logarithm is a 

Specifically, it is the logarithm is equivalent to an special case of the logarithm 
exponent to which a base exponential equation, the with base  in that the 
is raised to produce a given logarithm can be converted natural log always has base 
value. In the expressions to the exponential equation  Rather than notating the 
given, the base  has the  and then properties natural logarithm as 
same value. The exponent, of exponents can be applied  the notation used 

 in the expression  can to solve for is 
also be written as the 
logarithm,  and the 
value of  is the result of 
raising  to the power of 

7 . 9 . 11 . 

13 . 15 . 17 . 

19 . 21 . 23 . 

25 . 27 . 29 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     1361

31 . 33 . 35 . 

37 . 39 . 41 . 

43 . 45 . 47 . 

49 . 51 . 53 . 

55 . 57 . 59 . No, the function has no 
defined value for  To 
verify, suppose  is in 
the domain of the function 

 Then there 
is some number  such 
that  Rewriting 
as an exponential equation 
gives:  which is 
impossible since no such 
real number  exists. 
Therefore,  is not the 
domain of the function 

61 . Yes. Suppose there exists a 63 . No;  so 65 . 
real number  such that 

 Rewriting as an  is undefined. 
exponential equation gives 

 which is a real 
number. To verify, let 

 Then, by definition, 

6.4 Section Exercises 
1 . Since the functions are 3 . Shifting the function right or 5 . No. A horizontal asymptote 

inverses, their graphs are left and reflecting the would suggest a limit on the 
mirror images about the line function about the y-axis will range, and the range of any 

 So for every point affect its domain. logarithmic function in 
 on the graph of a general form is all real 

logarithmic function, there numbers. 
is a corresponding point 

 on the graph of its 
inverse exponential 
function. 

7 . Domain: ∞  Range: 9 . Domain: ∞  Range: 11 . Domain: ∞  Vertical 

∞ ∞ ∞ ∞ asymptote: 



1362     Answer Key

13 . Domain: ∞ 15 . Domain: ∞  Vertical 17 . Domain: ∞  ; 
Vertical asymptote: asymptote: Vertical asymptote:  ; 

End behavior: as 
∞

and as ∞ ∞

19 . Domain: ∞  ; Vertical 21 . Domain: ∞  Range: 23 . Domain: ∞  Range: 
asymptote:  ; ∞ ∞  Vertical ∞ ∞  Vertical 
End behavior: as 

asymptote: asymptote: 
, ∞  and as x-intercept: x-intercept: 

∞  , ∞ y-intercept: DNE y-intercept: DNE 

25 . Domain: ∞  Range: 27 . B 29 . C 

∞ ∞  Vertical 
asymptote: 
x-intercept: 
y-intercept: DNE 

31 . B 33 . C 35 . 

37 . 39 . C 41 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     1363

43 . 45 . 47 . 

49 . 51 . 53 . 

55 . 57 . The graphs of 59 . Recall that the argument of a 
 and logarithmic function must be 

positive, so we determine 
 appear to where  . From the 

be the same; Conjecture: 
for any positive base graph of the function 

 note that the 
graph lies above the x-axis on 
the interval ∞  and 
again to the right of the vertical 
asymptote, that is ∞
Therefore, the domain is 
∞ ∞

6.5 Section Exercises 
1 . Any root expression can be 3 . 5 . 

rewritten as an expression 
with a rational exponent so 
that the power rule can be 
applied, making the 
logarithm easier to 
calculate. Thus, 

7 . 9 . 11 . 

13 . 15 . 17 . 



1364     Answer Key

19 . 21 . 23 . 

25 . 27 . 

29 . 31. 

33 . 35 . 37 . 

39 .  By the quotient rule: 41 . Let  and  be positive 
integers greater than 

Rewriting as an exponential equation and solving for Then, by the change-of-
base formula, 

​
Checking, we find that 

 is defined, so 

6.6 Section Exercises 
1 . Determine first if the 3 . The one-to-one property can 5 . 

equation can be rewritten so be used if both sides of the 
that each side uses the equation can be rewritten as 
same base. If so, the a single logarithm with the 
exponents can be set equal same base. If so, the 
to each other. If the arguments can be set equal 
equation cannot be to each other, and the 
rewritten so that each side resulting equation can be 
uses the same base, then solved algebraically. The 
apply the logarithm to each one-to-one property cannot 
side and use properties of be used when each side of 
logarithms to solve. the equation cannot be 

rewritten as a single 
logarithm with the same 
base. 

7 . 9 . 11 . 

13 . No solution 15 . 17 . 

19 . 21 . 23 . 

25 . no solution 27 . 29 . 

31 . 33 . 35 . 

37 . 39 . No solution 41 . No solution 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     1365

43 . 45 . 47 . 

49 . 51 . 53 . 

55 . 57 . 59 . No solution 

61 . 63 . 65 . about 

67 . about 5 years 69 . 71 . 



1366     Answer Key

73 . 75 . 77 . about 

79 . 81 . 

6.7 Section Exercises 
1 . Half-life is a measure of 3 . Doubling time is a measure 5 . An order of magnitude is 

decay and is thus associated of growth and is thus the nearest power of ten by 
with exponential decay associated with exponential which a quantity 
models. The half-life of a growth models. The exponentially grows. It is 
substance or quantity is the doubling time of a also an approximate 
amount of time it takes for substance or quantity is the position on a logarithmic 
half of the initial amount of amount of time it takes for scale; Sample response: 
that substance or quantity the initial amount of that Orders of magnitude are 
to decay. substance or quantity to useful when making 

double in size. comparisons between 
numbers that differ by a 
great amount. For example, 
the mass of Saturn is 95 
times greater than the mass 
of Earth. This is the same as 
saying that the mass of 
Saturn is about  times, 
or 2 orders of magnitude 
greater, than the mass of 
Earth. 

7 .  The amount 9 . 150 11 . exponential; 
initially present is about 16.7 
units. 

13 . logarithmic 15 . logarithmic 17 . 

19 . about  years 21 . about  years 23 .  half-lives;  minutes 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     1367

25 . 27 . Let  for some non- 29 . 
negative real number mg 
such that  Then, 

31 . about  days 33 . 35 .  So the hourly 
half-life: about  minutes decay rate is about 

37 . 39 . 41 . about  minutes 
after 3 hours: doubling time: about 

minutes 

43 . 45 . about  minutes 47 . 
where  is in minutes. 

49 . MMS magnitude: 51 . 53 . C 

6.8 Section Exercises 
1 . Logistic models are best 3 . Regression analysis is the 5 . The y-intercept on the graph 

used for situations that have process of finding an of a logistic equation 
limited values. For example, equation that best fits a corresponds to the initial 
populations cannot grow given set of data points. To population for the 
indefinitely since resources perform a regression population model. 
such as food, water, and analysis on a graphing 
space are limited, so a utility, first list the given 
logistic model best points using the STAT then 
describes populations. EDIT menu. Next graph the 

scatter plot using the STAT 
PLOT feature. The shape of 
the data points on the 
scatter graph can help 
determine which regression 
feature to use. Once this is 
determined, select the 
appropriate regression 
analysis command from the 
STAT then CALC menu. 

7 . C 9 . B 11 .  ; 175 

13 . 15 . y-intercept: 17 .  koi 



1368     Answer Key

19 . about  months. 21 . 23 . About 38 wolves 

25 . About 8.7 years 27 . 29 . 

31 . 33 . 35 . When 

37 . 39 . 41 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     1369

43 . When 45 . When 47 . 

49 . About 25 51 . 53 . 

55 . When 57 . 59 . 
;  ; the 
regression curves are 
symmetrical about  , so 
it appears that they are 
inverse functions. 

Review Exercises 
1 . exponential decay; The 3 . 5 . 

growth factor,  is 
between  and 

7 . continuous decay; the 9 . domain: all real numbers; 11 . 
growth rate is negative. range: all real numbers strictly y-intercept: 

greater than zero; y-intercept: Domain: all real numbers; 
(0, 3.5); Range: all real numbers 

greater than 

13 . 15 . 17 . 



1370     Answer Key

19 . 21 . 23 . 

25 . Domain:  Vertical 27 . 29 . 
asymptote:  End 
behavior: as 

∞  and 
as ∞ ∞

31 . 33 . 35 . 

37 . 39 . 41 . no solution 

43 . no solution 45 . 47 . 

49 . 51 . about  years 53 . 

55 . 57 . about  minutes 59 . about  days 
  

61 . exponential 63 . 65 . about  days 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     1371

67 . logarithmic; 

Practice Test 
1 . About 13 dolphins. 3 . 5 . y-intercept: 

7 . 9 . 11 . 

13 . Domain:  Vertical 15 . 17 . 
asymptote:  End 
behavior: 

∞  and 
∞ ∞

19 . 21 . 23 . no solution 



1372     Answer Key

25 . 27 . 29 .  half-
life: about  days 

31 . 33 . logarithmic 

35 . exponential; 37 . logistic; 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     1373

Chapter 7 
Try It 
7.1 Angles 
1 . 2 . 3 . 

4 . 5 . 6 . 

7 . 8 . 9 . 1.88 

10 .  rad/s 11 . 1655 kilometers per hour 

7.2 Right Triangle Trigonometry 

1 . 2 . 

3 . 4 . 2 

5 . 6 . About 52 ft 
missing angle is 

7.3 Unit Circle 
1 . 2 . 3 . 

4 . approximately 0.866025403 5 . 6 . ⓐ 

ⓑ 

7 . 

7.4 The Other Trigonometric Functions 
1 . 



1374     Answer Key

2 . 

3 . 4 . 

5 . 6 . 7 . 

8 . 9 . 

10 . 

7.1 Section Exercises 
1 . 3 . Whether the angle is 5 . Linear speed is a 

positive or negative measurement found by 
determines the direction. A calculating distance of an 
positive angle is drawn in arc compared to time. 
the counterclockwise Angular speed is a 
direction, and a negative measurement found by 
angle is drawn in the calculating the angle of an 
clockwise direction. arc compared to time. 

7 . 9 . 11 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     1375

13 . 15 . 17 . 

19 . 21 . 23 . 

25 . 27 . 29 . 

31 . 33 .  radians 35 .  radians 

37 .  radians 39 .  radians 41 .  miles 

43 .  centimeters 45 .  meters 47 . 104.7198 cm2 

49 . 0.7697 in2 51 . 53 . 

55 . 57 . 59 .  rad/min  RPM 

61 .  in./s, 4.77 RPM , 63 . 65 .  miles 
deg/s 

67 . 69 . 794 miles per hour 71 . 2,234 miles per hour 

73 . 11.5 inches 



1376     Answer Key

7.2 Section Exercises 
1 . 3 . The tangent of an angle is 5 . For example, the sine of an 

the ratio of the opposite angle is equal to the cosine 
side to the adjacent side. of its complement; the 

cosine of an angle is equal 
to the sine of its 
complement. 

7 . 9 . 11 . 

13 . 15 . 17 . 

19 . 21 . 23 . 

25 . 27 . 29 . 

31 . 33 . 35 . 

37 . 39 . 41 . 

43 . 188.3159 45 . 200.6737 47 . 498.3471 ft 

49 . 1060.09 ft 51 . 27.372 ft 53 . 22.6506 ft  

55 . 368.7633 ft 

7.3 Section Exercises 
1 . The unit circle is a circle of 3 . Coterminal angles are 5 . The sine values are equal. 

radius 1 centered at the angles that share the same 
origin. terminal side. A reference 

angle is the size of the 
smallest acute angle, 
formed by the terminal side 
of the angle  and the 
horizontal axis. 

7 . I 9 . IV 11 . 

13 . 15 . 17 . 0 

19 . -1 21 . 23 . 

25 . 27 . 29 . 

31 . 33 . 35 .  Quadrant IV, 
,

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     1377

37 .  Quadrant II, 39.  Quadrant II, 
, ,

41 .  Quadrant II, 43 .  Quadrant III, 
, ,

45 .  Quadrant II, 47 .  Quadrant II, 

, ,

49 .  Quadrant IV, 51 . 53 . 

55 . 57 . 59 . 

61 . 63 . 65 . 

67 . 69 . 71 . 

73 . 75 . 77 . 

79 . 81 . −0.1736 83 . 0.9511 

85 . −0.7071 87 . −0.1392 89 . −0.7660 

91 . 93 . 95 . 

97 . 99 . 0 101 . 

103. 37.5 seconds, 97.5 
seconds, 157.5 seconds, 
217.5 seconds, 277.5 
seconds, 337.5 seconds 

7.4 Section Exercises 
1 . Yes, when the reference 3 . Substitute the sine of the 5 . The outputs of tangent and 

angle is  and the terminal angle in for  in the cotangent will repeat every 
side of the angle is in Pythagorean Theorem  units. 
quadrants I and III. Thus, a  Solve for  and 

 the sine and take the negative solution. 
cosine values are equal. 

7 . 9 . 11 . 

13 . 1 15 . 2 17 . 

19 . 21 . 23 . 



1378     Answer Key

25 . –1 27 . -2 29 . 

31 . 2 33 . 35 . –2 

37 . –1 39 . , , 41 .  

,  

, 

43 . 45 . 3.1 47 . 1.4 

49 . , , 51 . , 53 . –0.228 
, , , 

, 
, , 

55 . –2.414 57 . 1.414 59 . 1.540 

61 . 1.556 63 . 65 . 

67 . even 69 . even 71 . 

73 . 13.77 hours, period: 75 . 3.46 inches 

Review Exercises 
1 . 3 . 5 . 10.385 meters 

7 . 9 . 11 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     1379

13 . 15 . 1036.73 miles per hour 17 . 

19 . 21 . 23 . 

25 . 27 . 29 . 369.2136 ft 

31 . 33 . 35 . 

37 . all real numbers 39 . 41 . 

43 . 2 45 . –2.5 47 . 

49 . cosine, secant 

Practice Test 
1 . 3 . 6.283 centimeters 5 . 

7 . 9 . 3.351 feet per second, 11 . 
radians per second 

13 . 15 . real numbers 17 . 1 

19 . 21 . –0.68 23 . 



1380     Answer Key

Chapter 8 
Try It 
8.1 Graphs of the Sine and Cosine Functions 
1 . 2 .  compressed 3 .  right 

4 . 2 units up 5 . midline:  amplitude: 6 . 
 period: 

 phase shift: 

7 . two possibilities: 8 . 9 . 
 or 

midline:  amplitude: 
 period: 

phase shift: 

midline:  amplitude: 
 period: 

phase shift:  or none 

10 . 7 11 . 

8.2 Graphs of the Other Trigonometric Functions 
1 . 2 . It would be reflected across 3 . 

the line  becoming 
an increasing function. 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     1381

4 . This is a vertical reflection of 5 . 6 . 
the preceding graph because 
is negative. 

7 . 

8.3 Inverse Trigonometric Functions 
1 . 2 . ⓐ ⓑ  ⓒ  3 . 1.9823 or 113.578° 

ⓓ  

4 . 5 . 6 . 
radians 

7 . 8 . 9 . 

8.1 Section Exercises 
1 . The sine and cosine 3 . The absolute value of the 5 . At the point where the 

functions have the property constant  (amplitude) terminal side of  intersects 
that  for a increases the total range the unit circle, you can 
certain  This means that and the constant  (vertical determine that the 
the function values repeat shift) shifts the graph equals the y-coordinate of 
for every  units on the vertically. the point. 
x-axis. 



1382     Answer Key

7 . 9 . 11 . 

amplitude: 1; period:  midline: 
 maximum:  occurs 

amplitude:  period: at  minimum: 
occurs at  one full period 

midline:  maximum: 
is graphed from  to 

 occurs at amplitude: 4; period: 
minimum:  occurs at midline:  maximum 

occurs at  minimum: 
 for one period, the 

graph starts at 0 and ends at  occurs at  one 
full period occurs from  to 

13 . 15 . 17 . 

amplitude: 4; period: 2; midline: amplitude: 3; period: 
 maximum:  occurs midline:  maximum: 

at  minimum:  occurs at amplitude: 5; period: 
occurs at minimum:  occurs at midline:  maximum: 

 horizontal shift:  occurs at 
vertical translation 5; one minimum:  occurs at 
period occurs from  to  phase shift: 

vertical translation:  one full 
period can be graphed on 

 to 

19 . 21 . 23 . amplitude: 2; midline: 
 period: 4; 

equation: 

amplitude: 1; period: 
amplitude: 1 ; period: midline:  maximum: 
midline:  maximum:  occurs at 

 occurs at minimum:  occurs at 
minimum:  occurs at  phase shift: 

 phase shift: vertical shift: 0 
vertical translation: 1; one full 
period is from  to 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     1383

25 . amplitude: 2; period: 5; 27 . amplitude: 4; period: 2; 29 . amplitude: 2; period: 2; 
midline:  equation: midline:  equation: midline  equation: 

31 . 33 . 35 . 

37 .  is symmetric 39 . 41 . Maximum:  at  ; 
minimum:  at 

43 . A linear function is added to a 45 . There is no amplitude because 47 . The graph is symmetric with 
periodic sine function. The the function is not bounded. respect to the y-axis and there 
graph does not have an is no amplitude because the 
amplitude because as the linear function’s bounds decrease as 
function increases without  grows. There appears to be 
bound the combined function a horizontal asymptote at 

 will increase . 
without bound as well. The 
graph is bounded between the 
graphs of  and 

 because sine 
oscillates between −1 and 1. 

8.2 Section Exercises 
1 . Since  is the 3 . Answers will vary. Using the 5 . The period is the same: 

reciprocal function of unit circle, one can show 
 you can plot the that 

reciprocal of the coordinates 
on the graph of  to 
obtain the y-coordinates of 

 The x-intercepts 
of the graph  are 
the vertical asymptotes for 
the graph of 

7 . IV 9 . III 11 . period: 8; horizontal shift: 1 
unit to left 

13 . 1.5 15 . 5 17 . 



1384     Answer Key

19 . 21 . 

stretching factor: 6; period: 6; 
asymptotes: 

stretching factor: 2; period: 
asymptotes: 

23 . 25 . 

stretching factor: 1; period: 
asymptotes: Stretching factor: 1; period: 

asymptotes: 

27 . 29 . 

stretching factor: 2; period: 
asymptotes: stretching factor: 4; period: 

asymptotes: 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     1385

31 . 33 . 

stretching factor: 7; period: stretching factor: 2; period: 
asymptotes: asymptotes: 

35 . 37 . 39 . 

stretching factor:  period: 
asymptotes: 

41 . 43 . 45 . 

47 . 49 . 51 . 



1386     Answer Key

53 . 55 . ⓐ  57 . ⓐ  
ⓑ ⓑ 

ⓒ   after 0 seconds, 
the rocket is 0 mi above the 
ground;  after 30 
seconds, the rockets is 2 mi 
high; 
ⓓ As  approaches 60 

ⓒ   and  the seconds, the values of 
distance grows without bound grow increasingly large. The 
as  approaches  —i.e., at distance to the rocket is 
right angles to the line growing so large that the 
representing due north, the camera can no longer track it. 
boat would be so far away, 
the fisherman could not see it; 
ⓓ 3; when  the boat 
is 3 km away; 
ⓔ  1.73; when  the 
boat is about 1.73 km away; 
ⓕ  1.5 km; when 

8.3 Section Exercises 
1 . The function  is 3 .  is the radian measure of 5 . In order for any function to 

one-to-one on an angle between  and have an inverse, the 
thus, this interval is the  whose sine is 0.5. function must be one-to-one 
range of the inverse and must pass the 
function of horizontal line test. The 

 The function regular sine function is not 
 is one-to-one on one-to-one unless its 

 thus, this interval is domain is restricted in some 
the range of the inverse way. Mathematicians have 
function of agreed to restrict the sine 

function to the interval 
 so that it is one-to-

one and possesses an 
inverse. 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     1387

7 . True . The angle,  that 9 . 11 . 
equals , , 
will be a second quadrant 
angle with reference angle, 

, where  equals 
, . Since  is 

the reference angle for , 
 and 

= - 

13 . 15 . 17 . 1.98 

19 . 0.93 21 . 1.41 23 . 0.56 radians 

25 . 0 27 . 0.71 29 . -0.71 

31 . 33 . 0.8 35 . 

37 . 39 . 41 . 

43 . 45 . 47 . 

49 . 51 . approximately 53 . 0.395 radians 

domain  range 

55 . 1.11 radians 57 . 1.25 radians 59 . 0.405 radians 

61 . No. The angle the ladder 
makes with the horizontal 
is 60 degrees. 



1388     Answer Key

Review Exercises 
1 . amplitude: 3; period: 3 . amplitude: 3; period: 5 . amplitude: 3; period: 

midline:  no asymptotes midline:  no asymptotes midline:  no asymptotes 

7 . amplitude: 6; period: 9 . stretching factor: none; period: 11 . stretching factor: 3; period: 
midline:  no asymptotes  midline:  asymptotes: midline:  asymptotes: 

 where  is an  where  is an 
integer integer 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     1389

13 . amplitude: none; period:  no 15 . amplitude: none; period: 17 . amplitude: none; period:  no 
phase shift; asymptotes: no phase shift; asymptotes: phase shift; asymptotes: 

 where  is an odd  where  is an integer  where  is an integer 
integer 

19 . largest: 20,000; smallest: 21 . amplitude: 8,000; period: 23 . In 2007, the predicted 
4,000 10; phase shift: 0 population is 4,413. In 

2010, the population will 
be 11,924. 

25 . 5 in. 27 . 10 seconds 29 . 

31 . 33 . 35 . No solution 

37 . 39 . The graphs are not symmetrical 41 . The graphs appear to be 
with respect to the line identical. 
They are symmetrical with 
respect to the -axis. 



1390     Answer Key

Practice Test 
1 . amplitude: 0.5; period: 3 . amplitude: 5; period: 5 . amplitude: 1; period: 

midline midline: midline: 

7 . amplitude: 3; period: 9 . amplitude: none; period: 11 . amplitude: none; period: 
midline: midline:  asymptotes: midline:  asymptotes: 

 where  is an  where  is an integer 
integer 

13 . amplitude: none; period: 15 . amplitude: 2; period: 2; 17 . amplitude: 1; period: 12; 
midline: midline: phase shift:  midline 

19 . 21 . period:  horizontal shift: 23 .  period: 2; 
phase shift: 0 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     1391

25 . 27 . The views are different because 29 . 
the period of the wave is 
Over a bigger domain, there 
will be more cycles of the 
graph. 

31 . On the approximate intervals 33 . 

35 . This graph is periodic with a 37 . 39 . 
period of 

41 . 43 . 45 . 

47 . False 49 . approximately 0.07 radians 



1392     Answer Key

Chapter 9 
Try It 
9.1 Verifying Trigonometric Identities and Using Trigonometric Identities to 
Simplify Trigonometric Expressions 

1 . 2 . 

3 . 4 . This is a difference of squares formula: 

5 . 

9.2 Sum and Difference Identities 
1 . 2 . 3 . 

4 . 5 . 

9.3 Double-Angle, Half-Angle, and Reduction Formulas 
1 . 2 . 

3 . 

4 . 

5 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     1393

9.4 Sum-to-Product and Product-to-Sum Formulas 
1 . 2 . 3 . 

4 . 5 . 

9.5 Solving Trigonometric Equations 
1 . 2 . 3 .  and 

4 . 5 . 

9.1 Section Exercises 
1 . All three functions, , , and , are even. 

This is because 
,

and 

3 . When  then 5 . 7 . 
 which is 

undefined. 

9 . 11 . 13 . 

15 . 17 . 19 . 

21 . 23 . 25 . 

27 . 29 . Answers will vary. Sample proof: 

31 . Answers will vary. Sample proof: 

33 . Answers will vary. Sample proof: 

35 . False 37 . False 39 . Proved with negative and 
Pythagorean identities 

41 . True 



1394     Answer Key

9.2 Section Exercises 
1 . The cofunction identities 3 .  so  is 5. 

apply to complementary odd. 
angles. Viewing the two 
acute angles of a right so  is even. 
triangle, if one of those 
angles measures  the 
second angle measures 

 Then 
 The 

same holds for the other 
cofunction identities. The 
key is that the angles are 
complementary. 

7 . 9 . 11 . 

13 . 15 . 17 . 

19 . 21 . 

23 . 25 . 27 . 

29 . 31 . 33 . They are the same. 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     1395

35 . They are the different, try 37 . They are the same. 39 . They are the different, try 

41 . They are different, try 43 . 45 .  or 0.9659 

47 . 49 . 

51 . 53 . True 

55 . True. Note that 
   
and expand the right hand 
side. 

9.3 Section Exercises 
1 . Use the Pythagorean 3 . 5 . a)  b)  c) 

identities and isolate the multiplying the top and 
squared term. bottom by  and 

 respectively. 

7 . a)  b)  c) 

9 . 

11 . 13 . 15 . 

17 . 19 . 21 . a)  b)  c) 

23 . a)  b)  c) 25 . 27 . 

29 . 31 . 33 . 

35 . 37. 

39 . 41 . 43 . 



1396     Answer Key

45 . 47 . 49 . 

51 . 53 . 

55 . 57 . 

59 . 61 . 

63 . 

9.4 Section Exercises 
1 . Substitute      into cosine 3 . Answers will vary. There are 5 . 

some equations that involve 
and      into sine and a sum of two trig 
evaluate. expressions where when 

converted to a product are 
easier to solve. For example: 

   When 
converting the numerator to 
a product the equation 
becomes: 

7 . 9 . 11 . 

13 . 15 . 17 . 

19 . 21 . 23 . 

25 . 27 . 29 . 

31 . 

33 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     1397

35 . 

37 . 39 . 

41 . 43 . 45 . It is an identity. 

47 . It is not an identity, but 49 . 51 . 
 is. 

53 . 55 . Start with  Make a substitution and let  and let 
 so  becomes 

Since  and  we can solve for  and  in terms of x and y 
and substitute in for  and get 

57 . 59 . 

61 . 63 . 

9.5 Section Exercises 
1 . There will not always be 3 . If the sine or cosine function 5 . 

solutions to trigonometric has a coefficient of one, 
function equations. For a isolate the term on one side 
basic example, of the equals sign. If the 

number it is set equal to has 
an absolute value less than 
or equal to one, the 
equation has solutions, 
otherwise it does not. If the 
sine or cosine does not have 
a coefficient equal to one, 
still isolate the term but 
then divide both sides of the 
equation by the leading 
coefficient. Then, if the 
number it is set equal to has 
an absolute value greater 
than one, the equation has 
no solution. 

7 . 9 . 11 . 

13 . 15 . 17 . 



1398     Answer Key

19 . 21 . 23 . 

25 . 27 . 29 . 

31 . 33 . , 
, 
, 

, 
, 

35 . 37 . 39 . 

41 . 43 . There are no solutions. 45 . , 

47 . , 49 . There are no solutions. 51 . There are no solutions. 

, 

, 

53 . 55 . 57 . 

59 . 61 . , , 63 . , , 
, , 

65 . 67 . , , 69 . There are no solutions. 
, 

71 . , 73 . 75 . 
, 
, 

77 . 79 . 81 . 

83 . 85 . 87 . There are no solutions. 

89 . 91 . There are no solutions. 93 . 

95 . 97 . 99 . 

101. 103 . 105 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     1399

Review Exercises 
1 . , 3 . 5 . 

, 

, 

7 . 9 . Yes 11 . 

13 . 

15 . 

17 . 19 . 21 . 

23 . 25 . 27 . 

29 . 31 . 33 . 

35 . 37 . 39 . 

41 . 43 . 45 . No solution 

47 . 49 . 

Practice Test 
1 . 1 3 . 5 . 

7 . 9 . 11 . 

13 . 15 . 17 . 

19 . 21 . 23 . 



1400     Answer Key

25 . 27 . 

29 . 31 . Amplitude:  , period:  , 33 . Amplitude: 8, fast period: 
frequency: 60 Hz  , fast frequency: 500 

Hz, slow period:  , slow 
frequency: 10 Hz 

35 . 
, 31 second 

Chapter 10 
Try It 
10.1 Non-right Triangles: Law of Sines 

1 . 2 . Solution 1 3 . 

Solution 2 

4 . two 5 . about  square feet 6 . 161.9 yd. 

10.2 Non-right Triangles: Law of Cosines 
1 .  2 .  3 . Area = 552 square feet 

4 . about 8.15 square feet 

10.3 Polar Coordinates 
1 . 2 . 3 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     1401

4 . 5 .  or, in the 
standard form for a circle, 

10.4 Polar Coordinates: Graphs 
1 . The equation fails the 2 . Tests will reveal symmetry 3 . 

symmetry test with respect about the polar axis. The 
to the line  and with zero is  and the 
respect to the pole. It passes maximum value is 
the polar axis symmetry 
test. 

4 . The graph is a rose curve, 5 . 6 . 
even 

Rose curve,  odd 

10.5 Polar Form of Complex Numbers 
1 . 2 . 13 3 . 

4 . 5 . 6 . 

7 . 8 . 



1402     Answer Key

10.6 Parametric Equations 
1 . 2 . 3 . 

4 . 5 . 6 . 

10.7 Parametric Equations: Graphs 
1 . 2 . 3 . The graph of the parametric 

equations is in red and the 
graph of the rectangular 
equation is drawn in blue dots 
on top of the parametric 
equations. 

10.8 Vectors 
1 . 2 . 3 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     1403

4 . 
Magnitude = 

10.1 Section Exercises 
1 . The altitude extends from 3 . When the known values are 5 . A triangle with two given 

any vertex to the opposite the side opposite the sides and a non-included 
side or to the line containing missing angle and another angle. 
the opposite side at a 90° side and its opposite angle. 
angle. 

7 . 9 . 11 . 

13 . 15 . one triangle, 17 . two triangles, 
 or 

19 . two triangles, 21 . two triangles, 23 . no triangle possible 
 or 

or 

25 .  or 27 . 29 . 

31 . 33 . 35 . 

37 . 39 . 41 . 

43 . 45 . 47 . 

49 . 51 . 53 . 

55 . 57 . 59 . 51.4 feet 

61 . The distance from the 63 . 2.6 ft 65 . 5.6 km 
satellite to station  is 
approximately 1716 miles. 
The satellite is 
approximately 1706 miles 
above the ground. 

67 . 371 ft 69 . 5936 ft 71 . 24.1 ft 

73 . 19,056 ft2 75 . 445,624 square miles 77 . 8.65 ft2 

10.2 Section Exercises 
1 . two sides and the angle 3 .  is the semi-perimeter, 5 . The Law of Cosines must be 

opposite the missing side. which is half the perimeter used for any oblique (non-
of the triangle. right) triangle. 

7 . 11.3 9 . 34.7 11 . 26.7 



1404     Answer Key

13 . 15 . not possible 17 . 95.5° 

19 . 26.9° 21 . 23 . 

25 . 27 . 177.56 in2 29 . 0.04 m2 

31 . 0.91 yd2 33 . 3.0 35 . 29.1 

37 . 0.5 39 . 70.7° 41 . 77.4° 

43 . 25.0 45 . 9.3 47 . 43.52 

49 . 1.41 51 . 0.14 53 . 18.3 

55 . 48.98 57 . 59 . 7.62 

61 . 85.1 63 . 24.0 km 65 . 99.9 ft 

67 . 37.3 miles 69 . 2371 miles 71 . 

73 . 292.4 miles 75 . 65.4 cm2 77 . 468 ft2 

10.3 Section Exercises 
1 . For polar coordinates, the 3 . Determine  for the point, 5 . The point  has a 

point in the plane depends then move  units from the positive angle but a negative 
on the angle from the pole to plot the point. If  is radius and is plotted by 
positive x-axis and distance negative, move  units from moving to an angle of 
from the origin, while in the pole in the opposite and then moving 3 units in 
Cartesian coordinates, the direction but along the the negative direction. This 
point represents the same angle. The point is a places the point 3 units 
horizontal and vertical distance of  away from the down the negative y-axis. 
distances from the origin. origin at an angle of  from The point  has a 
For each point in the the polar axis. 
coordinate plane, there is negative angle and a 
one representation, but for positive radius and is 
each point in the polar plotted by first moving to an 
plane, there are infinite angle of  and then 
representations. moving 3 units down, which 

is the positive direction for a 
negative angle. The point is 
also 3 units down the 
negative y-axis. 

7 . 9 . 11 . 

13 . 15 . 17 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     1405

19 . 21 . 23 . 

25 . 27 . 29 .  or 
 circle 

31 .  line 33 .  line 35 .  hyperbola 

37 .  circle 39 .  line 41 . 

43 . 45 . 47 . 

49 . 51 . 53 . 

55 . 57 . 59 . 

61 . 63 . 65 . 



1406     Answer Key

67 . 69 . 71 . 

73 . 75 . A vertical line with  units 77 . A horizontal line with 
left of the y-axis.  units below the x-axis. 

79 . 81 . 83 . 

10.4 Section Exercises 
1 . Symmetry with respect to 3 . Test for symmetry; find 5 . The shape of the polar 

the polar axis is similar to zeros, intercepts, and graph is determined by 
symmetry about the -axis, maxima; make a table of whether or not it includes a 
symmetry with respect to values. Decide the general sine, a cosine, and constants 
the pole is similar to type of graph, cardioid, in the equation. 
symmetry about the origin, limaçon, lemniscate, etc., 
and symmetric with respect then plot points at 
to the line  is similar   and   and 
to symmetry about the sketch the graph. 

-axis. 

7 . symmetric with respect to 9 . symmetric with respect to 11 . symmetric with respect to 
the polar axis the polar axis, symmetric the line 

with respect to the line 
 symmetric with 

respect to the pole 

13 . Symmetric with respect to 15 . symmetric with respect to 17 . circle 
line  (y-axis) the pole 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     1407

19 . cardioid 21 . cardioid 23 . one-loop/dimpled limaçon 

25 . one-loop/dimpled limaçon 27 . inner loop/two-loop limaçon 29 . inner loop/two-loop limaçon 

31 . inner loop/two-loop limaçon 33 . lemniscate 35 . lemniscate 

37 . rose curve 39 . rose curve 41 . Archimedes’ spiral 

43 . Archimedes’ spiral 45 . 47 . 



1408     Answer Key

49 . 51 . 53 . 

55 . They are both spirals, but 57 . Both graphs are curves 59 . When the width of the 
not quite the same. with 2 loops. The equation domain is increased, more 

with a coefficient of  has petals of the flower are 
two loops on the left, the visible. 
equation with a coefficient 
of 2 has two loops side by 
side. Graph these from 0 to 

 to get a better picture. 

61 . The graphs are three-petal, 63 . The graphs are spirals. The 65 . 
rose curves. The larger the smaller the coefficient, the 
coefficient, the greater the tighter the spiral. 
curve’s distance from the 
pole. 

67 . 69 . 71 . 

and at   since 
is squared 

10.5 Section Exercises 
1 . a is the real part, b is the 3 . Polar form converts the real 5 . 

imaginary part, and and imaginary part of the It is used to simplify polar 
complex number in polar form when a number has 
form using  and been raised to a power. 

7 . 9 . 11 . 

13 . 15 . 17 . 

19 . 21 . 23 . 

25 . 27 . 29 . 

31 . 33 . 35 . 

37 . 39 . 41 . 

43 . 45 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     1409

47 . 49 . 51 . 

53 . 55 . 57 . 

59 . 61 . 

10.6 Section Exercises 
1 . A pair of functions that is 3 . Choose one equation to 5 . Some equations cannot be 

dependent on an external solve for  substitute into written as functions, like a 
factor. The two functions are the other equation and circle. However, when 
written in terms of the same simplify. written as two parametric 
parameter. For example, equations, separately the 

 and equations are functions. 

7 . 9 . 11 .  or 

13 . 15 . 17 . 

19 . 21 . 23 . 

25 . 27 . 29 . 

31 . 33 . 35 .  Ellipse 

37 .  Circle 39 . 41 . 



1410     Answer Key

43 . yes, at 45 . 47 . answers may vary: 

1 -3 1 

2 0 7 

3 5 17 

49 . answers may vary: , 

10.7 Section Exercises 
1 . plotting points with the 3 . The arrows show the 5 . The parametric equations 

orientation arrow and a orientation, the direction of show the different vertical 
graphing calculator motion according to and horizontal motions over 

increasing values of time. 

7 . 9 . 11 . 

13 . 15 . 17 . 

19 . 21 . 23 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     1411

25 . 27 . 29 . 

31 . 33 . 35 . 

37 . 39 . There will be 100 back-and- 41 . Take the opposite of the 
forth motions.  equation. 

43 . The parabola opens up. 45 . 47 . 



1412     Answer Key

49 . 51 . 53 .    

55 .    57 . 59 . 

61 . The -intercept changes. 63 . 65 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     1413

67 . approximately 3.2 seconds 69 . 1.6 seconds 71 . 

73 . 

10.8 Section Exercises 
1 . lowercase, bold letter, 3 . They are unit vectors. They 5 . The first number always 

usually are used to represent the represents the coefficient of 
horizontal and vertical the  and the second 
components of a vector. represents the 
They each have a magnitude 
of 1. 

7 . 9 . not equal 11 . equal 

13 . equal 15 . 17 . 

19 . 21 . 

23 . 25 . 27 . 

29 . 31 . 33 . 

35 . 37 . 39 . 



1414     Answer Key

41 . 43 . 45 . 

47 . 49 . 51 . 

53 . 55 . ⓐ  58.7 ⓑ  12.5 57 .  pounds, 
pounds 

59 .  pounds, 61 . 4.635 miles, 17.764° N of E 63 . 17 miles. 10.318 miles 
pounds 

65 . Distance: 2.868. Direction: 67 . 4.924°. 659 km/hr 69 . 4.424° 
86.474° North of West, or 
3.526° West of North 

71 . 73 . 21.801°, relative to the 75 . parallel: 16.28, 
car’s forward direction perpendicular: 47.28 

pounds 

77 . 19.35 pounds, 231.54° 79 . 5.1583 pounds, 75.8° from 
from the horizontal the horizontal 

Review Exercises 
1 . Not possible 3 . 5 . distance of the plane from 

point  2.2 km, elevation 
of the plane: 1.6 km 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     1415

7 . 9 . 40.6 km 11 . 

13 . 15 . 17 . 

19 . 21 . 23 . symmetric with respect to 
the line 

25 . 27 . 29 . 5 

31 . 33 . 35 . 

37 . 39 . 41 . 

43 . 45 . 47 . 



1416     Answer Key

49 . 51 . a. 

b. The ball is 14 feet high and 184 feet 
from where it was launched. 

c. 3.3 seconds 

53 . not equal 55 . 4i 57 .  i  j 

59 . Magnitude: 61 . 63 . 
Direction: 

Practice Test 
1 . 3 . 5 . 

7 . 9 . 11 . 

13 . 15 . 17 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     1417

19 . 21 . 23 . −4i − 15j 

25 . 

Chapter 11 
Try It 
11.1 Systems of Linear Equations: Two Variables 
1 . Not a solution. 2 . The solution to the system is 3 . 

the ordered pair 

4 . 5 . 6 . No solution. It is an 
inconsistent system. 

7 . The system is dependent so 8 . 700 children, 950 adults 
there are infinite solutions 
of the form 

11.2 Systems of Linear Equations: Three Variables 
1 . 2 . No solution. 3 . Infinite number of solutions 

of the form 

11.3 Systems of Nonlinear Equations and Inequalities: Two Variables 
1 .  and 2 . 3 . 



1418     Answer Key

4 . 

11.4 Partial Fractions 
1 . 2 . 3 . 

4 . 

11.5 Matrices and Matrix Operations 

1 . ​ ​ ​ 2 . 

11.6 Solving Systems with Gaussian Elimination 

1 . 2 . 3 . 

4 . ​ 5 . 6 . $150,000 at 7%, $750,000 at 
8%, $600,000 at 10% 

11.7 Solving Systems with Inverses 

1 . 

2 . 3 . 4 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     1419

11.8 Solving Systems with Cramer's Rule 
1 . 2 . 3 . 

11.1 Section Exercises 
1 . No, you can either have 3 . This means there is no 5 . You can solve by 

zero, one, or infinitely many. realistic break-even point. By substitution (isolating  or 
Examine graphs. the time the company ), graphically, or by addition. 

produces one unit they are 
already making profit. 

7 . Yes 9 . Yes 11 . 

13 . 15 . 17 . No solutions exist. 

19 . 21 . 23 . 

25 . No solutions exist. 27 . 29 . 

31 . 33 . 35 . 

37 . 39 . 41 . Consistent with one 
solution 

43 . Consistent with one 45 . Dependent with infinitely 47 . 
solution many solutions 

49 . 51 . 53 . 

55 . 57 . They never turn a profit. 59 . 

61 . The numbers are 7.5 and 63 . 24,000 65 . 790 second-year students, 
20.5. 805 first-year students 

67 . 56 men, 74 women 69 . 10 gallons of 10% solution, 71 . Swan Peak: $750,000, 
15 gallons of 60% solution Riverside: $350,000 

73 . $12,500 in the first 75 . High-tops: 45, Low-tops: 15 77 . Infinitely many solutions. 
account, $10,500 in the We need more 
second account. information. 



1420     Answer Key

11.2 Section Exercises 
1 . No, there can be only one, 3 . Not necessarily. There could 5 . Every system of equations 

zero, or infinitely many be zero, one, or infinitely can be solved graphically, by 
solutions. many solutions. For substitution, and by 

example,  is not a addition. However, systems 
solution to the system of three equations become 
below, but that does not very complex to solve 
mean that it has no solution. graphically so other 

methods are usually 
preferable. 

7 . No 9 . Yes 11 . 

13 . 15 . 17 . 

19 . 21 . 23 . No solutions exist 

25 . 27 . 29 . 

31 . 33 . 35 . 

37 . 39 . 41 . 

43 . 45 . 47 . 

49 . 51 . 24, 36, 48 53 . 70 grandparents, 140 
parents, 190 children 

55 . Your share was $19.95, 57 . There are infinitely many 59 . 500 students, 225 children, 
Shani’s share was $40, and solutions; we need more and 450 adults 
your other roommate’s information 
share was $22.05. 

61 . The BMW was $49,636, the 63 . $400,000 in the account 65 . The United States 
Jeep was $42,636, and the that pays 3% interest, consumed 26.3%, Japan 
Toyota was $47,727. $500,000 in the account 7.1%, and China 6.4% of 

that pays 4% interest, and the world’s oil. 
$100,000 in the account 
that pays 2% interest. 

67 . Saudi Arabia imported 69 . Birds were 19.3%, fish were 
16.8%, Canada imported 18.6%, and mammals were 
15.1%, and Mexico 15.0% 17.1% of endangered 

species 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     1421

11.3 Section Exercises 
1 . A nonlinear system could be 3 . No. There does not need to 5 . Choose any number 

representative of two circles be a feasible region. between each solution and 
that overlap and intersect in Consider a system that is plug into  and  If 
two locations, hence two bounded by two parallel  then there is 
solutions. A nonlinear lines. One inequality profit. 
system could be represents the region above 
representative of a parabola the upper line; the other 
and a circle, where the represents the region below 
vertex of the parabola the lower line. In this case, 
meets the circle and the no points in the plane are 
branches also intersect the located in both regions; 
circle, hence three solutions. hence there is no feasible 

region. 

7 . 9 . 11 . 

13 . 15 . 17 . 

19 . 21 . 

23 . 25 . 27 . No Solutions Exist 

29 . No Solutions Exist 31 . 

33 . 35 . 

37 . 39 . 

41 . 43 . 45 . 



1422     Answer Key

47 . 

49 . 

51 . No Solution Exists 53 .  and 55 . 12, 288 

57 . 2–20 computers 

11.4 Section Exercises 
1 . No, a quotient of 3 . Graph both sides and 5 . If we choose  then 

polynomials can only be ensure they are equal. the B-term disappears, 
decomposed if the letting us immediately know 
denominator can be that  We could 
factored. For example, alternatively plug in 
cannot be decomposed , giving us a B-value 
because the denominator of 
cannot be factored. 

7 . 9 . 11 . 

13 . 15 . 17 . 

19 . 21 . 23 . 

25 . 27 . 29 . 

31 . 33 . 35 . 

37 . 39 . 41 . 

43 . 45 . 47 . 

49 . 51 . 53 . 

55 . 57 . 59 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     1423

11.5 Section Exercises 
1 . No, they must have the 3 . Yes, if the dimensions of 5 . Not necessarily. To find 

same dimensions. An are  and the we multiply the first row of 
example would include two dimensions of  are  by the first column of  to 
matrices of different both products will be get the first entry of  To 
dimensions. One cannot add defined. find  we multiply the 
the following two matrices first row of  by the first 
because the first is a column of  to get the first 
matrix and the second is a entry of  Thus, if those 

 matrix. are unequal, then the matrix 
 has no multiplication does not 

commute. 
sum. 

7 . 9 . 11 . Undidentified; dimensions 
do not match 

13 . 15 . 17 . 

19 . 21 . 23 . 

25 . Undefined; dimensions do 27 . 29 . 
not match. 

31 . 33 . Undefined; inner 35 . 
dimensions do not match. 

37 . 39 . 41 . 

43 . 45 . 47 . 

49 . 51 . 53 . 

 
55 . 57 . 59 . 

 



1424     Answer Key

11.6 Section Exercises 
1 . Yes. For each row, the 3 . No, there are numerous 5 . No. A matrix with 0 entries 

coefficients of the variables correct methods of using for an entire row would have 
are written across the row operations on a matrix. either zero or infinitely 
corresponding row, and a Two possible ways are the many solutions. 
vertical bar is placed; then following: (1) Interchange 
the constants are placed to rows 1 and 2. Then 
the right of the vertical bar.  (2) 

 Then divide 
row 1 by 9. 

7 . 9 . 11 . 

13 . 15 . 17 . No solutions 

19 . 21 . 23 . 

25 . 27 . 29 . 

31 . 33 . 35 . 

37 . 39 . 41 . 

43 . 45 . 47 . 

49 . 51 . No solutions exist. 53 . 860 red velvet, 1,340 
chocolate 

55 . 4% for account 1, 6% for 57 . $126 59 . Banana was 3%, pumpkin 
account 2 was 7%, and rocky road 

was 2% 

61 . 100 almonds, 200 cashews, 
600 pistachios 

11.7 Section Exercises 
1 . If  is the inverse of 3 . No, because  and  are 5 . Yes. Consider the matrix  The 

then  the identity both 0, so 
matrix. Since  is also the which requires us to divide inverse is found with the following 
inverse of by 0 in the formula. calculation: 
You can also check by 
proving this for a 
matrix. 

7 . 9 . 11 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     1425

13 . 15 . 17 . There is no inverse 

19 . 21 . 23 . 

25 . 27 . 29 . 

31 . 33 . 35 . 

37 . 39 . 41 . 

43 . 45 . 47 . 

49 . 51 . 53 . Infinite solutions. 

55 . 50% oranges, 25% 57 . 10 straw hats, 50 beanies, 59 . Micah ate 6, Joe ate 3, and 
bananas, 20% apples 40 cowboy hats Albert ate 3. 

61 . 124 oranges, 10 lemons, 8 
pomegranates 

11.8 Section Exercises 
1 . A determinant is the sum 3 . The inverse does not exist. 5 . 

and products of the entries 
in the matrix, so you can 
always evaluate that 
product—even if it does end 
up being 0. 

7 . 9 . 11 . 

13 . 15 . 17 . 

19 . 21 . 23 . 

25 . 27 . 29 . 

31 . 33 . 35 . 

37 . 39 . 41 . 



1426     Answer Key

43 . Infinite solutions 45 . 47 . 

49 . Yes; 18, 38 51 . Yes; 33, 36, 37 53 . $7,000 in first account, 
$3,000 in second account. 

55 . 120 children, 1,080 adult 57 . 4 gal yellow, 6 gal blue 59 . 13 green tomatoes, 17 red 
tomatoes 

61 . Strawberries 18%, oranges 63 . 100 for movie 1, 230 for 65 . 300 almonds, 400 
9%, kiwi 10% movie 2, 312 for movie 3 cranberries, 300 cashews 

Review Exercises 
1 . No 3 . 5 . 

7 . No solutions exist. 9 . 11 . Infinite solutions 

13 . No solutions exist. 15 . 17 . 

19 . 11, 17, 33 21 . 23 . No solution 

25 . No solution 27 . 29 . 

31 . 33 . 35 . 

37 . 39 . 41 . undefined; dimensions do 
not match 

43 . undefined; inner 45 . 47 . 
dimensions do not match 

49 . undefined; inner 51 .  with infinite 53 . 
dimensions do not match 

solutions 

55 . 57 . No solutions exist. 59 . No solutions exist. 

61 . 63 . No inverse exists. 65 . 

67 . 69 . 17% oranges, 34% 71 . 0 
bananas, 39% apples 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     1427

73 . 6 75 . 77 . (x, 5x + 3) 

79 . 

Practice Test 
1 . Yes 3 . No solutions exist. 5 . 

7 . 9 . 

11 . 13 . 15 . 

17 . 19 . 21 . 

23 . No solutions exist. 25 . 27 . 

29 . 32 or more cell phones per 
day 

Chapter 12 
Try It 
12.1 The Ellipse 
1 . 2 . 3 . center:  vertices: 

co-vertices:  foci: 



1428     Answer Key

4 . Standard form: 5 . Center:  vertices: 6 . 
center:  vertices: and  co-vertices: center:  vertices: 
co-vertices:  foci:  and  and  co-

vertices:  and 
 foci:  and 

foci:  and 

7 . ⓐ  

ⓑ  The people are standing 
358 feet apart. 

12.2 The Hyperbola 
1 . Vertices:  Foci: 2 . 3 . 

4 . vertices:  co-vertices: 5 . center:  vertices: 6 . The sides of the tower can be 
 foci:  and  co-vertices: modeled by the hyperbolic 

asymptotes:  and  foci: equation. 
 and 

 asymptotes: 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     1429

12.3 The Parabola 
1 . Focus:  Directrix: 2 . Focus:  Directrix: 3 . 

Endpoints of the latus rectum: Endpoints of the latus rectum: 

4 . Vertex:  Axis of 5 . Vertex:  Axis of 6 . ⓐ  
symmetry:  Focus: symmetry:  Focus: ⓑ  The depth of the cooker 

 Directrix:  Directrix: is 500 mm 
Endpoints of the latus rectum: Endpoints of the latus rectum: 

 and  and 

12.4 Rotation of Axes 
1 . ⓐ  hyperbola ⓑ  ellipse 2 . 3 . ⓐ  hyperbola ⓑ  ellipse 

12.5 Conic Sections in Polar Coordinates 
1 . ellipse; 2 . 3 . 

4 . 



1430     Answer Key

12.1 Section Exercises 
1 . An ellipse is the set of all 3 . This special case would be a 5 . It is symmetric about the 

points in the plane the sum circle. x-axis, y-axis, and the origin. 
of whose distances from two 
fixed points, called the foci, 
is a constant. 

7 . yes; 9 . yes; 11 .  Endpoints of 
major axis  and 

 Endpoints of 
minor axis  and 

 Foci at 

13 . 15 . 17 . 
Endpoints of major axis Endpoints of major axis 

Endpoints of major axis  Endpoints of  Endpoints of 
 and minor axis  Foci minor axis 

Endpoints of minor axis at Foci at 
 Foci at 

19 . 21 . 23 .  Endpoints 
Endpoints of major axis of major axis 

 Endpoints of Endpoints of major axis Endpoints of minor axis 
minor axis  Foci at 
Foci at Endpoints of minor axis 

Foci at 

25 .  Endpoints of 27 . Foci 
major axis 
Endpoints of minor axis 

 Foci at 

29 . Focus 31 . Foci 33 . Center  Vertices 

Foci 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     1431

35 . Center  Vertices 37 . Center  Vertices 

Focus 
Foci Note that this ellipse is a circle. 

The circle has only one focus, 
which coincides with the center. 

39 . Center  Vertices 41 . Center  Vertices 43 . Center  Vertices 

Foci Foci Foci 

45 . Center  Vertices 47 . 49 . 

Focus 

51 . 53 . 55 . 

57 . 59 .  square units. 61 .  square units. 

63 . 65 .  . Distance = 67 . Approximately 51.96 feet 
17.32 feet 



1432     Answer Key

12.2 Section Exercises 
1 . A hyperbola is the set of 3 . The foci must lie on the 5 . The center must be the 

points in a plane the transverse axis and be in the midpoint of the line 
difference of whose interior of the hyperbola. segment joining the foci. 
distances from two fixed 
points (foci) is a positive 
constant. 

7 . yes 9 . yes 11 .  vertices: 
 foci: 

asymptotes: 

13 .  vertices: 15 .  vertices: 
 foci:  foci: 

asymptotes: 

asymptotes: 

17 .  vertices: 19 .  vertices: 
 foci:  foci: 

asymptotes: asymptotes: 

21 .  vertices: 23 .  vertices: 
 foci:  foci: 

asymptotes: asymptotes: 

25 .  vertices: 27 . 
 foci: 

asymptotes: 

29 . 31 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     1433

33 . 35 . 37 . 

39 . 41 . 43 . 

45 . 47 . 49 . 

51 . 53 . 55 . 

57 . 59 . 



1434     Answer Key

61 . 63 . 65 . 

67 . 69 . 

12.3 Section Exercises 
1 . A parabola is the set of 3 . The graph will open down. 5 . The distance between the 

points in the plane that lie focus and directrix will 
equidistant from a fixed increase. 
point, the focus, and a fixed 
line, the directrix. 

7 . yes 9 . yes 

11 . 13 . 

15 . 17 . 

19 . 

21 . 

23 . 

25 . 

27 . 

29 . 31 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     1435

33 . 35 . 37 . 

39 . 41 . 43 . 

45 . 47 . 49 . 

51 . 53 . 55 . 

57 . 59 . 61 . 

63 . At the point 2.25 feet 65 . 0.5625 feet 67 . 
above the vertex. height is 7.2 feet 

69 . 2304 feet 

12.4 Section Exercises 
1 . The  term causes a 3 . The conic section is a 5 . It gives the angle of rotation 

rotation of the graph to hyperbola. of the axes in order to 
occur. eliminate the  term. 

7 .  parabola 9 .  hyperbola 11 .  ellipse 

13 .  parabola 15 .  parabola 17 . 
ellipse 

19 . 21 . 



1436     Answer Key

23 . 25 . 

27 . 29 . 

31 . 33 . 35 . 

37 . 39 . 

41 . 43 . 45 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     1437

47 . 49 . 51 . 

53 . 55 . 57 . 

59 . 

12.5 Section Exercises 
1 . If eccentricity is less than 1, 3 . The directrix will be parallel 5 . One of the foci will be 

it is an ellipse. If eccentricity to the polar axis. located at the origin. 
is equal to 1, it is a parabola. 
If eccentricity is greater than 
1, it is a hyperbola. 

7 . Parabola with  and 9 . Hyperbola with  and 11 . Parabola with  and 
directrix  units below the directrix  units above the directrix  units to the 
pole. pole. right of the pole. 

13 . Ellipse with  and 15 . Hyperbola with  and 17 . Hyperbola with  and 
directrix  units to the right directrix  units above directrix  units to the 
of the pole. the pole. right of the pole. 

19 . 21 . 23 . 

25 . 27 . 29 . 

31 . 33 . 35 . 



1438     Answer Key

37 . 39 . 41 . 

43 . 45 . 47 . 

49 . 51 . 53 . 

55 . 57 . 59 . 

Review Exercises 
1 .  center: 

vertices: 

foci: 

3 . 

5 . center:  vertices: 7 . center:  vertices: 9 . 

foci: foci: 

11 . Approximately 35.71 feet 13 .  center: 15 . 
 vertices: 

foci: center:  vertices: 
 foci: 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     1439

17 . 19 . 21 . 

23 . 25 .  vertex: 27 . 
vertex:  focus:  focus: 

 directrix:  directrix: 

29 . 31 . 33 .  parabola 

35 . 37 . 39 . 
ellipse 

41 . Hyperbola with  and 43 . Ellipse with  and 45 . 
directrix  units to the left directrix  unit above the 
of the pole. pole. 



1440     Answer Key

47 . 49 . 

Practice Test 
1 .  center: 3 . center:  vertices: 5 . 

vertices: 
foci: 

foci: 

7 .  center: 9 . center:  vertices: 11 . 
vertices  foci:  foci: 

asymptotes: asymptotes: 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     1441

13 . 15 . 17 . Approximately  feet 
vertex:  focus: 

 directrix: 

19 . parabola; 21 . 23 . Hyperbola with  and 
directrix  units to the 
right of the pole. 

25 . 

Chapter 13 
Try It 
13.1 Sequences and Their Notations 
1 . The first five terms are 2 . The first five terms are 3 . The first six terms are 

4 . 5 . 6 . 

7 . 8 . 9 . The first five terms are 



1442     Answer Key

13.2 Arithmetic Sequences 
1 . The sequence is arithmetic. 2 . The sequence is not 3 . 

The common difference is arithmetic because 

4 . 5 . 6 . 

7 . There are 11 terms in the 8 . The formula is 
sequence.  and it will 

take her 42 minutes. 

13.3 Geometric Sequences 
1 . The sequence is not 2 . The sequence is geometric. 3 . 

geometric because The common ratio is  . 
. 

4 . 5 . 6 . 

7 . ⓐ  
ⓑ The number of hits will 
be about 333. 

13.4 Series and Their Notations 
1 . 38 2 . 3 . 

4 . 5 . $2,025 6 . 

7 . 9,840 8 . $275,513.31 9 . The sum is not defined. 

10 . The sum of the infinite 11 . The sum of the infinite 12 . 3 
series is defined. series is defined. 

13 . The series is not geometric. 14 . 15 . $32,775.87 

13.5 Counting Principles 
1 . 7 2 . There are 60 possible 3 . 120 

breakfast specials. 

4 . 60 5 . 12 6 . 

7 . 8 . 9 . 64 sundaes 

10 . 840 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     1443

13.6 Binomial Theorem 
1 . ⓐ 35 ⓑ 330 2 . ⓐ 3 . 

ⓑ  

13.7 Probability 
1 . 2 . 3 . 

Outcome Probability 

Heads 

Tails 

4 . 5 . 6 . 

13.1 Section Exercises 
1 . A sequence is an ordered list 3 . Yes, both sets go on 5 . A factorial is the product of a positive 

of numbers that can be indefinitely, so they are both integer and all the positive integers below 
either finite or infinite in infinite sequences. it. An exclamation point is used to indicate 
number. When a finite the operation. Answers may vary. An 
sequence is defined by a example of the benefit of using factorial 
formula, its domain is a notation is when indicating the product It 
subset of the non-negative is much easier to write than it is to write 
integers. When an infinite out 
sequence is defined by a 
formula, its domain is all 
positive or all non-negative 
integers. 

7 . First four terms: 9 . First four terms: 11 . First four terms: 
 .  . 

13 . First four terms: 15 . First four terms: 17 . 
 . 

19 . 21 . 

23 . 25 . 27 . First five terms: 

29 . First five terms: 31 . 

33 . 35 . 37 . 

39 . 41 . 43 . First four terms: 



1444     Answer Key

45 . First four terms: 47 . 49 . 

51 . 53 . 55 . 

57 . First five terms: , , 59 . First five terms: 2, 3, 5, 17, 61 . 
, , 65537 

63 . First six terms: 0.042, 65 . First four terms: 5.975, 67 . If  is a term in 
0.146, 0.875, 2.385, 4.708 2.765, 185.743, 1057.25, the sequence, then solving 

6023.521 the equation 
 for  will 

yield a non-negative 
integer. However, if 

 then 
 so 

is not a term in the 
sequence. 

69 . 71 . 

13.2 Section Exercises 
1 . A sequence where each 3 . We find whether the 5 . Both arithmetic sequences 

successive term of the difference between all and linear functions have a 
sequence increases (or consecutive terms is the constant rate of change. 
decreases) by a constant same. This is the same as They are different because 
value. saying that the sequence their domains are not the 

has a common difference. same; linear functions are 
defined for all real numbers, 
and arithmetic sequences 
are defined for natural 
numbers or a subset of the 
natural numbers. 

7 . The common difference is 9 . The sequence is not 11 . 
arithmetic because 

13 . 15 . 17 . 

19 . 21 . 23 . 

25 . 27 . 29 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     1445

31 . 33 . 

35 . 37 . 

39 . 41 . First five terms: 43 . 

45 . 47 . 49 . 

51 . 53 . There are 10 terms in the 55 . There are 6 terms in the 
sequence. sequence. 

57 . The graph does not 59 . 61 . 
represent an arithmetic 
sequence. 

63 . 65 . 67 . Answers will vary. 
Examples:  and 

69 . 71 . The sequence begins to 73 . Answers will vary. Check to 
have negative values at the see that the sequence is 
13th term, arithmetic. Example: 

Recursive formula: 

First 4 terms: 



1446     Answer Key

13.3 Section Exercises 
1 . A sequence in which the 3 . Divide each term in a 5 . Both geometric sequences 

ratio between any two sequence by the preceding and exponential functions 
consecutive terms is term. If the resulting have a constant ratio. 
constant. quotients are equal, then However, their domains are 

the sequence is geometric. not the same. Exponential 
functions are defined for all 
real numbers, and 
geometric sequences are 
defined only for positive 
integers. Another difference 
is that the base of a 
geometric sequence (the 
common ratio) can be 
negative, but the base of an 
exponential function must 
be positive. 

7 . The common ratio is 9 . The sequence is geometric. 11 . The sequence is geometric. 
The common ratio is 2. The common ratio is 

13 . The sequence is geometric. 15 . 17 . 
The common ratio is 

19 . 21 . 23 . 

25 . 27 . 29 . 

31 . 33 . 35 . 

37 . 39 . 41 . 

43 . 45 . There are  terms in the 47 . The graph does not 
sequence. represent a geometric 

sequence. 

49 . 51 . Answers will vary. 53 . 
Examples: 

and 

55 . The sequence exceeds 57 .  is the first non- 59 . Answers will vary. Example: 
at the 14th term, integer value Explicit formula with a decimal 

common ratio: 
 First 4 

terms: 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     1447

13.4 Section Exercises 
1 . An  partial sum is the 3 . A geometric series is the 5 . An annuity is a series of 

sum of the first  terms of a sum of the terms in a regular equal payments that 
sequence. geometric sequence. earn a constant 

compounded interest. 

7 . 9 . 11 . 

13 . 15 . 17 . 

19 . 21. 

23 . The series is defined. 25 . The series is defined. 27 . 

29 . Sample answer: The graph 31 . 49 33 . 254 
of  seems to be 
approaching 1. This makes 

∞
sense because 

is a defined infinite 
geometric series with 

35 . 37 . 39 . 

41 . 43 . 45 . 

47 . $3,705.42 49 . $695,823.97 51 . 

53 . 9 terms 55 . 57 . $400 per month 

59 . 420 feet 61 . 12 feet 



1448     Answer Key

13.5 Section Exercises 
1 . There are  ways for 3 . The addition principle is 5 . A combination; 

either event  or event  to applied when determining 
occur. the total possible of 

outcomes of either event 
occurring. The multiplication 
principle is applied when 
determining the total 
possible outcomes of both 
events occurring. The word 
“or” usually implies an 
addition problem. The word 
“and” usually implies a 
multiplication problem. 

7 . 9 . 11 . 

13 . 15 . 17 . 

19 . 21 . 23 . 

25 . 27 . 29 . 

31 . 33 . 35 . 9 

37 . Yes, for the trivial cases 39 . 41 . 
 and  If 

then 
   If 

 then 

43 . 45 . 47 . 

49 . 51 . 53 . 

13.6 Section Exercises 
1 . A binomial coefficient is an 3 . The Binomial Theorem is 5 . 15 

alternative way of denoting defined as 
the combination  It 
is defined as 

and can be used to expand 
any binomial. 

7 . 35 9 . 10 11 . 12,376 

13 . 15 . 

17 . 

19 . 21 . 

23 . 25 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     1449

27 . 29 . 

31 . 33 . 35 . 

37 . 39 . 41 . 

43 . 45 . 47 . 

49 . The expression 
 cannot be 

expanded using the 
Binomial Theorem because 
it cannot be rewritten as a 
binomial. 



1450     Answer Key

13.7 Section Exercises 
1 . probability; The probability 3 . An experiment is an activity 5 . The probability of the union 

of an event is restricted to with an observable result. of two events occurring is a 
values between  and number that describes the 
inclusive of  and likelihood that at least one 

of the events from a 
probability model occurs. In 
both a union of sets 

 and a union of 
events  the union 
includes either  or 
both. The difference is that a 
union of sets results in 
another set, while the union 
of events is a probability, so 
it is always a numerical 
value between  and 

7 . 9 . 11 . 

13 . 15 . 17 . 

19 . 21 . 23 . 

25 . 27 . 29 . 

31 . 33 . 35 . 
1 2 3 4 5 6 

1 (1,1) (1,2) (1,3) (1,4) (1,5) (1,6) 
2 3 4 5 6 7 

2 (2,1) (2,2) (2,3) (2,4) (2,5) (2,6) 
3 4 5 6 7 8 

3 (3,1) (3,2) (3,3) (3,4) (3,5) (3,6) 
4 5 6 7 8 9 

4 (4,1) (4,2) (4,3) (4,4) (4,5) (4,6) 
5 6 7 8 9 10 

5 (5,1) (5,2) (5,3) (5,4) (5,5) (5,6) 
6 7 8 9 10 11 

6 (6,1) (6,2) (6,3) (6,4) (6,5) (6,6) 
7 8 9 10 11 12 

37 . 39 . 41 . 

43 . 45 . 47 . 

49 . 51 . 53 . 

55 . 57 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



Answer Key     1451

59 . 

Review Exercises 
1 . 3 . 5 . The sequence is arithmetic. 

The common difference is 

7 . 9 . 11 . 

13 . 15 . 4, 16, 64, 256, 1024 17 . 

19 . 21 . 23 . 

25 . 27 . 29 . $5,617.61 

31 . 6 33 . 35 . 

37 . 39 . 41 . 

43 . 45 . 

47 . 49 . 51 . 
1 2 3 4 5 6 

1 1,1 1,2 1,3 1,4 1,5 1,6 

2 2,1 2,2 2,3 2,4 2,5 2,6 

3 3,1 3,2 3,3 3,4 3,5 3,6 

4 4,1 4,2 4,3 4,4 4,5 4,6 

5 5,1 5,2 5,3 5,4 5,5 5,6 

6 6,1 6,2 6,3 6,4 6,5 6,6 

53 . 55 . 57 . 

Practice Test 
1 . 3 . The sequence is arithmetic. 5 . 

The common difference is 

7 . The sequence is geometric. 9 . 11 . 
The common ratio is 

13 . 15 . Total in account: 17 . 
 Interest 

earned: 



1452     Answer Key

19 . 21 . 23 . 

25 . 27 . 29 . 

Access for free at openstax.org



Index     1453

Index 
A Binomial Theorem  1257 continuous  430 
AAS (angle-angle-side)  870 break-even point  1014 continuous function  422 
absolute maximum  227 convex limaçons  922 
absolute minimum  227 C coordinate plane  1150 
absolute value  210, 280 cardioid  920 correlation coefficient  370 
absolute value equation  151, 152 carrying capacity  622 cosecant  720, 766 
absolute value function  207 Cartesian coordinate system  82 cosecant function  766, 767, 770,
absolute value functions  280, 284 Cartesian equation  908 804 
absolute value inequality  161, 162 Celsius  288 cosine  840, 841 
addition method  1006, 1008, 1012 center of a hyperbola  1132 cosine function  702, 743, 745, 747,
Addition Principle  1244 center of an ellipse  1117 750, 754 
addition property  158 central rectangle  1133 cost function  233, 1013 
adjacent side  689 change-of-base formula  599, 599 cotangent  720, 772 
algebraic expression  17 circle  1034, 1036 cotangent function  772, 804 
altitude  870 circular motion  754 coterminal angles  677, 679 
ambiguous case  873 circumference  671 Cramer’s Rule  1094, 1095, 1097,
amplitude  746 co-vertex  1117 1101 
angle  666 co-vertices  1119 cube root  410 
angle of depression  696 coefficient  49, 49, 409, 462 cubic functions  502 
angle of elevation  696, 869 coefficient matrix  1066, 1068, curvilinear path  945 
angle of rotation  1167 1086, 1089 
angular speed  683, 683 cofunction  821 D 
annual interest  1239 cofunction identities  694, 821 De Moivre  940 
annual percentage rate (APR)  537 column  1053 De Moivre’s Theorem  941, 942 
annuity  1239 column matrix  1054 decompose a composite function 
apoapsis  1177 combinations  1248, 1254 242 
arc  671 combining functions  235 decomposition  1043 
arc length  672, 680, 702 common base  603 decreasing function  222, 318 
arccosine  782 common difference  1210, 1231 decreasing linear function  319 
Archimedes’ spiral  929 common logarithm  564 degenerate conic sections  1163 
arcsine  782 common ratio  1222, 1234 degree  49, 49, 415, 667 
arctangent  782 commutative  236 dependent system  1003, 1012,
area  115 commutative property of addition 1025 
area of a circle  409 14 dependent variable  176 
area of a sector  681 commutative property of Descartes  933 
argument  937 multiplication  14 Descartes’ Rule of Signs  468 
arithmetic sequence  1210, 1212, complement of an event 1265 determinant  1093, 1096, 1097 
1213, 1214, 1231 completing the square  137, 138 difference of squares  54 
arithmetic series  1232 complex conjugate  127 dimpled limaçons  922 
arrow notation  474 Complex Conjugate Theorem  467 direct variation  510, 511 
associative property of addition  14 complex number  123, 933 directrix  1149, 1152, 1153, 1154,
associative property of complex plane  123, 934 1157, 1177, 1178, 1183, 1184, 1185 
multiplication  14 composite function  235 discriminant  140, 140 
asymptotes  1133 composition of functions  235 displacement  683 
augmented matrix  1066, 1069, compound inequality  160 distance formula  88, 813, 1134,
1071, 1084 compound interest  537 1150 
average rate of change  217 compression  330, 552, 578 distributive property  15 
axes of symmetry  1132 conditional equation  97 diverges  1236 
axis of symmetry  390, 392, 1157, conic  1116, 1132, 1184 dividend  451 
1158 conic section  1165 Division Algorithm  452, 460 

conic sections  953 divisor  451 
B conjugate axis  1132 domain  176, 185, 198, 200, 201,
base  12 consistent system  1003 202, 781, 782 
binomial  49, 452 constant  17 domain and range  199, 199 
binomial coefficient 1254 constant function  207 domain of a composite function 
binomial expansion  1255, 1258 constant of variation  511, 511 240 



1454     Index

dot product  982 G initial point  970, 973 
double-angle formulas  827, 828 Gauss  933, 1020, 1065 initial side  667 
doubling time  620 Gaussian elimination  1020, 1068, inner-loop limaçons  924 
Dürer  924 1069 input  176 

general form  391 integers  8, 11 
E general form of a quadratic intercepts  87 
eccentricity  1178, 1178 function  393 Intermediate Value Theorem  441,
electrostatic force  220 Generalized Pythagorean 441 
elimination  1035 Theorem  887 interpolation  368 
ellipse  960, 960, 1036, 1116, 1117, geometric sequence  1222, 1234 intersection  1263 
1119, 1120, 1125, 1149, 1179, 1183 geometric series  1234 interval  157 
ellipsis  1196 global maximum  444, 444 interval notation  157, 199, 223 
end behavior  411, 485 global minimum  444, 444 inverse cosine function  782 
endpoint  219, 666 graph in two variables  84 inverse function  289, 502 
entry  1053 gravity  963 inverse matrix  1084, 1086 
equation  19, 183 greatest common factor  58, 58, inverse of a radical function  505 
equation in quadratic form  153 131 inverse of a rational function  507 
equation in two variables  84 inverse property of addition  16 
Euler  933 H inverse property of multiplication 
even function  262, 803 half-angle formulas  833, 834 16 
even-odd identities  803, 805 half-life  610, 615 inverse sine function  782 
event  1261 Heaviside method  1045 inverse tangent function  782 
experiment  1261 Heron of Alexandria  893 inverse trigonometric functions 
explicit formula  1196, 1197, 1198, Heron’s formula  893 781, 782, 785, 789 
1215, 1225 horizontal asymptote  477, 483, inverse variation  513 
exponent  12 485 inverse variations  513 
Exponential decay  528, 535, 547, horizontal compression  268, 856 inversely proportional  513 
615, 618, 621, 634 horizontal line  106, 336, 337 invertible functions  500 
exponential equation  602 horizontal line test  190 invertible matrix  1079, 1093 
exponential function  529 horizontal reflection  258 irrational numbers  9, 11 
exponential growth  528, 531, 548, horizontal shift  251, 550, 574, 743 
615, 620, 622 horizontal stretch  268 J 
exponential notation  12 hyperbola  1132, 1136, 1137, 1137, Johnson  1148 
extraneous solution  607 1139, 1140, 1142, 1144, 1149, 1179, joint variation  515 
extraneous solutions  149 1181 
extrapolation  368 hypotenuse  690 K 

Kovalevskaya  1115 
F I Kronecker  933 
factor by grouping  60 identities  725 
Factor Theorem  461 identity equation  97 L 
factorial  1205 identity matrix  1079, 1079, 1084 latus rectum  1149, 1152, 1153,
factoring  131 identity property of addition  15 1157 
Fahrenheit  288 identity property of multiplication Law of Cosines  888, 890 
feasible region  1039 15 Law of Sines  871, 889 
finite arithmetic sequence  1216 imaginary number  123 leading coefficient  49, 49, 415 
finite sequence  1197 inconsistent equation  97 leading term  49, 49, 415 
foci  1116, 1118, 1119, 1133 inconsistent system  1003, 1011, least common denominator  68, 99 
focus  1116, 1149, 1152, 1153, 1024 least squares regression  369 
1154, 1157, 1177, 1183, 1184, 1185 increasing function  222, 318 lemniscate  925 
FOIL  51 increasing linear function  319 linear equation  97 
formula  19, 183 independent system  1003 Linear Factorization Theorem  467,
function  176, 211 independent variable  176 467 
function notation  178 index  44, 44 linear function  316, 317 
Fundamental Counting Principle index of summation  1231 linear growth  528 
1245 inequality  1037 linear model  352, 365 
Fundamental Theorem of Algebra infinite geometric sequence  1236 linear relationship  365 
465, 466 infinite sequence  1197 linear speed  683 

infinite series  1236 local extrema  221 

Access for free at openstax.org



Index     1455

local maximum  221, 444 opposite side  689 599 
local minimum  221, 444 order of magnitude  616 principal nth root  44, 44 
logarithm  561 order of operations  12 principal square root  38, 38 
logarithmic equation  608 ordered pair  83, 176, 200 probability  1261 
logarithmic model  637 ordered triple  1020 probability model  1261 
logistic growth model  622 origin  82, 280 product of two matrices  1059 
long division  450 outcomes  1261 product rule for logarithms  592,
lower limit of summation  1231 output  176 594 

product-to-sum formulas  840, 842 
M P profit function  1014 
magnitude  210, 250, 934, 970 parabola  390, 397, 958, 1032, properties of determinants  1100 
main diagonal  1067 1149, 1153, 1153, 1154, 1158, 1177, Proxima Centauri  616 
major and minor axes  1119 1179, 1180 Pythagoras  933 
major axis  1117, 1121 parallel  106 Pythagorean identities  802, 805 
matrix  1053, 1054, 1066 parallel lines  338, 340 Pythagorean identity  813 
matrix multiplication  1059, 1080, parallelograms  974 Pythagorean Identity  705, 705,
1085 parameter  945 725 
matrix operations  1054 parametric equations  945, 957, Pythagorean Theorem  88, 141,
maximum value  390 958 828, 857, 887, 961 
Maxwell  1115 parametric form  960 
measure of an angle  667 parent function  574 Q 
midline  746 partial fraction  1043 quadrant  82 
midpoint formula  91 partial fraction decomposition quadrantal angle  669 
minimum value  390 1043, 1044 quadratic  1047, 1049 
minor axis  1117 Pascal  924 quadratic equation  131, 132, 137,
model breakdown  367 Pascal's Triangle  1256 138, 851 
modulus  210, 937 perfect square trinomial  53 quadratic formula  138, 139, 140,
monomial  49 periapsis  1177 852 
Multiplication Principle  1245 perimeter  115 quadratic function  393, 396 
multiplication property  158 period  728, 743, 761, 762, 847 quotient  451 
multiplicative inverse  1081, 1082 periodic function  743 quotient identities  804, 805 
multiplicative inverse of a matrix permutation  1246 quotient rule for logarithms  593 
1079, 1079 perpendicular  107 
multiplicity  434, 435 perpendicular lines  339, 340 R 
mutually exclusive events  1264 pH  591 radian  672, 673, 674 

phase shift  748 radian measure  673 
N piecewise function  210 radical  38, 38 
n factorial  1205 piecewise functions  1200 radical equation  149 
natural logarithm  566, 606 point-slope form  321 radical expression  38, 38 
natural numbers  8, 11, 176 point-slope formula  108, 1138 Radical expressions  44 
negative angle  668 polar axis  901 radical functions  500 
Newton’s Law of Cooling  621 polar coordinates  901, 903, 905, radicand  38, 38, 149 
nominal rate  537 914 radiocarbon dating  619 
non-right triangles  870 polar equation  909, 915, 917, 1178 range  176, 782 
nondegenerate conic sections polar form  934 rate of change  217, 352 
1163 polar form of a complex number rational equation  100 
nonlinear inequality  1037 936 rational expression  66, 98, 1043,
nth partial sum  1230 polar form of a conic  1185 1044, 1049 
nth root of a complex number  942 polar grid  901, 902 rational function  479, 487, 492 
nth term of the sequence  1196, pole  901 rational number  98 
1197 polynomial  49, 49, 462 rational numbers  8, 11 

polynomial equation  147 Rational Zero Theorem  462, 462 
O polynomial function  414, 429, 436, ray  666 
oblique triangle  870 442 real number line  10 
odd function  262, 803 position vector  970, 972 real numbers  10 
one-loop limaçon  922 positive angle  668 reciprocal  107, 289, 410 
one-to-one  548, 561, 591, 599 power function  409 reciprocal function  473 
one-to-one function  188, 289, 781 power rule for logarithms  594, reciprocal identities  804, 805 



1456     Index

reciprocal identity  766, 772 smooth curve  422 trigonometric functions  722 
rectangular coordinates  901, 903, solution set  97, 1021 trigonometric identities  888 
905 solving systems of linear trinomial  49 
rectangular equation  909, 951 equations  1006 turning point  420, 438 
rectangular form  937, 960 special angles  812 
recursive formula  1203, 1213, square matrix  1054, 1093 U 
1213, 1223 square root property  136 union of two events  1263 
reduction formulas  831, 832 SSA (side-side-angle)  870 unit circle  674, 689, 702, 714, 847 
reference angle  678, 713, 722 SSS (side-side-side) triangle  887 unit vector  978 
reflection  553, 581 standard form  105 upper limit of summation  1231 
regression analysis  633, 637, 640 standard form of a quadratic upper triangular form  1020 
regression line  369 function  393 
relation  176 standard position  667, 668, 970 V 
remainder  451 stretch  552 variable  17 
Remainder Theorem  460 stretching/compressing factor varies directly  510, 511 
removable discontinuity  481, 482 763, 764 varies inversely  513 
Restricting the domain  297 substitution method  1005 vector  970 
resultant  974 sum and difference formulas for vector addition  974 
revenue function  1013 cosine  812 vertex  390, 666, 1117, 1118, 1150,
Richter Scale  560 sum and difference formulas for 1157 
right triangle  689, 781 sine  815 vertex form of a quadratic 
roots  390 sum and difference formulas for function  392 
rose curve  927 tangent  817 vertical asymptote  476, 479, 485,
row  1053 sum-to-product formulas  842, 843 782 
row matrix  1054 summation notation  1230 vertical compression  264 
row operations  1067, 1070, 1072, surface area  499 vertical line  105, 336, 337 
1082, 1083, 1084, 1084 symmetry test  915 vertical line test  189 
row-echelon form  1067, 1070, synthetic division  454, 464 vertical reflection  258 
1071 system of equations  1066, 1067, vertical shift  249, 330, 550, 576,
row-equivalent  1068 1069, 1071, 1086 621, 748 

system of linear equations  357, vertical stretch  264, 330, 578 
S 1002, 1004, 1005 vertices  1117, 1119 
sample space  1261 system of nonlinear equations volume  115 
SAS (side-angle-side) triangle  887 1032 volume of a sphere  409 
scalar  975, 1056 system of nonlinear inequalities 
scalar multiple  976, 1056 1039 W 
Scalar multiplication  975, 1056 system of three equations in three whole numbers  8, 11 
scatter plot  365 variables  1097 
scientific notation  32, 32, 33 
secant  720, 766 T X 

x-axis  82 
secant function  766 tangent  720, 761, 762 x-coordinate  83 
sector of a circle  681 tangent function  761, 762, 763, x-intercept  87, 334 
sequence  1196, 1197, 1210 775, 804 
series  1230 term  1196, 1210 
set-builder notation  157, 202 term of a polynomial  49, 49 Y 
sigma  1230 term of a polynomial function  414 y-axis  82 
sine  803, 841, 842 terminal point  970, 973 y-coordinate  83 
sine function  702, 742, 744, 747, terminal side  667 y-intercept  87, 317 
753, 756 transformation  249, 330 
sinusoidal function  745 translation  1120 Z 
slope  102, 317 transverse axis  1132 zero-product property  131 
slope-intercept form  316, 317, 321 trigonometric equations  952 zeros  390, 430, 435, 464, 919 

Access for free at openstax.org



Index     1457